# Monthly Journal Review August 2023

Date: 7 August 2023
Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- PLoS Genetics (PLoS Genet)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
- [Polygenic risk prediction: why and when out-of-sample prediction R2 can exceed SNP-based heritability](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.06.006)  
  SNP-based heritability; meta-analysis; out-of-sample prediction R(2); polygenic risk prediction  
  

- [Genotype error due to low-coverage sequencing induces uncertainty in polygenic scoring](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.06.015)  
  polygenic scores; error; effect sizes; genotype error; low-coverage sequencing data; risk stratification; uncertainty  
 &#x261E; *Pick*  

- [Beyond the exome: What's next in diagnostic testing for Mendelian conditions](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.06.009)  
  PacBio sequencing; RNA sequencing; exome reanalysis; long-read sequencing; meatabolomics; nanopore sequencing; non-diagnostic exome; optical genome mapping  
 &#x261E; *Pick* 

## Genetics
- [The divergence of mean phenotypes under persistent directional selection](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyad091)  
  evolutionary divergence; mutation bias; phenotypic divergence; phenotypic scaling; random genetic drift; selective interference  
  

- [Timesweeper: accurately identifying selective sweeps using population genomic time series](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyad084)  
  evolution; genomic time series; machine learning; positive selection; selective sweeps  
  

- [On the number of genealogical ancestors tracing to the source groups of an admixed population](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyad079)  
  admixture; ancestry; genealogy; population genetics  
 &#x261E; *Pick*  

- [Recurrent mutation in the ancestry of a rare variant](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyad049)  
  Ewens sampling formula; coalescent theory; human SNPs; recurrent mutation  
 &#x261E; *Pick*  

## PLoS Biol
- [Diamonds in the not-so-rough: Wild relative diversity hidden in crop genomes](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3002235)  
  crop wild relatives, crop genomes, domestication  
  

- [The manifold costs of being a non-native English speaker in science](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3002184)  
  careers in research, language, diversity, community  
  

- [The fitness of an introgressing haplotype changes over the course of divergence and depends on its size and genomic location](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3002185)  
  introgression, epistasis, genetic background, population divergence, genetic incompatibilities, recombination rate, *Drosophila melanogaster*  
 &#x261E; *Pick*  

- [Insights into the coexistence of birds and humans in cropland through meta-analyses of bird exclosure studies, crop loss mitigation experiments, and social surveys](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3002166)  
  human--bird coexistence, cropland, land-use conflict, crop loss mitigation  
 &#x261E; *Pick*

## PLoS Genet
- [Characterizing the landscape of gene expression variance in humans](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1010833)  
  gene expression, gene expression variance, organismal function, fitness, transcriptional variance, sequence variation  
 &#x261E; *Pick*  

- [The evolutionary maintenance of ancient recombining sex chromosomes in the ostrich](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1010801)  
  sex chromosomes, pseudoautosomal region, recombination, sexually antagonistic variation   

## PNAS
- [Host-parasite coevolution and the stability of genetic kin recognition](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2220761120)  
  Hamilton’s Rule; evolution of altruism; genetic kin recognition; host–parasite coevolution; kin discrimination  
  

- [Speciation across the Earth driven by global cooling in terrestrial orchids](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2102408120)  
  biodiversity; biogeography; climate change; diversification; macroevolution  
  

- [Researchers move closer to defining the Anthropocene](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2310613120)  
  Anthropocene, anthropology  
  

- [Echoes of ancient introgression punctuate stable genomic lineages in the evolution of figs](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2222035120)  
  Ficus; Moraceae; hybridization; phylogenomics  
  

- [Demographic consequences of phenological asynchrony for North American songbirds](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2221961120)  
  climate change; demography; green-up; phenological mismatch; phenology  
 &#x261E; *Pick*  
 Lukas
- [Biodiversity and pollination benefits trade off against profit in an intensive farming system](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2212124120)  
  agroecology; biodiversity-friendly farming; ecosystem services; land-use intensity; wild bees
&#x261E; *Pick* 
  

- [The inheritance of social status: England, 1600 to 2022](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2300926120)  
  assortative mating; genetic inheritance; social mobility; status persistence  
 &#x261E; *Pick*  

- [Mutation pressure, drift, and the pace of molecular coevolution](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2306741120)  
  coevolution; mitochondria; molecular drive; organelles; plastids
  

## Theor Popul Biol
Nothing this month


# Summary of Picks

## AJHG

### Petter et al. (2023): Genotype error due to low-coverage sequencing induces uncertainty in polygenic scoring

Polygenic scores (PGSs) have emerged as a standard approach to predict phenotypes from genotype data in a wide array of applications from socio-genomics to personalized medicine. Traditional PGSs assume genotype data to be error-free, ignoring possible errors and uncertainties introduced from genotyping, sequencing, and/or imputation. In this work, we investigate the effects of genotyping error due to low coverage sequencing on PGS estimation. **We leverage SNP array and low-coverage whole-genome sequencing data (lcWGS, median coverage 0.04×) of 802 individuals from the Dana-Farber PROFILE cohort to show that PGS error correlates with sequencing depth (p = 1.2 × 10−7)**. We develop a **probabilistic approach that incorporates genotype error in PGS estimation to produce well-calibrated PGS credible intervals and show that the probabilistic approach increases classification accuracy by up to 6%** as compared to traditional PGSs that ignore genotyping error. Finally, we use **simulations to explore the combined effect of genotyping and effect size errors and their implication on PGS-based risk-stratification**. Our results illustrate the **importance of considering genotyping error as a source of PGS error especially for cohorts with varying genotyping technologies and/or low-coverage sequencing**.

### Wojcik et al. (2023): Beyond the exome: What’s next in diagnostic testing for Mendelian conditions

Despite advances in **clinical genetic testing**, including the introduction of **exome sequencing (ES), more than 50% of individuals with a suspected Mendelian condition lack a precise molecular diagnosis**. Clinical evaluation is increasingly undertaken by specialists outside of clinical genetics, often occurring in a tiered fashion and typically ending after ES. The current diagnostic rate reflects **multiple factors, including technical limitations, incomplete understanding of variant pathogenicity, missing genotype-phenotype associations, complex gene-environment interactions, and reporting differences between clinical labs**. Maintaining a clear understanding of the rapidly evolving landscape of diagnostic tests beyond ES, and their limitations, presents a challenge for non-genetics professionals. Newer tests, such as **short-read genome or RNA sequencing, can be challenging to order, and emerging technologies, such as optical genome mapping and long-read DNA sequencing, are not available clinically**. Furthermore, there is no clear guidance on the next best steps after inconclusive evaluation. Here, we **review why a clinical genetic evaluation may be negative, discuss questions to be asked in this setting, and provide a framework for further investigation, including the advantages and disadvantages of new approaches that are nascent in the clinical sphere**. We present a guide for the next best steps after inconclusive molecular testing based upon phenotype and prior evaluation, including **when to consider referral to research consortia focused on elucidating the underlying cause of rare unsolved genetic disorders**.


## Genetics

### Mooney et al. (2023): On the number of genealogical ancestors tracing to the source groups of an admixed population

Members of genetically **admixed populations possess ancestry from multiple source groups**, and studies of human genetic admixture frequently estimate ancestry components corresponding to fractions of individual genomes that trace to specific ancestral populations. However, **the same numerical ancestry fraction can represent a wide array of admixture scenarios within an individual’s genealogy**. Using a mechanistic model of admixture, we consider **admixture genealogically: how many ancestors from the source populations does the admixture represent?** We consider **African-Americans**, for whom continent-level estimates produce a 75–85% value for African ancestry on average and 15–25% for European ancestry. Genetic studies together with key features of African-American demographic history suggest ranges for parameters of a simple three-epoch model. Considering parameter sets compatible with estimates of current ancestry levels, we infer that if **all genealogical lines of a random African-American born during 1960–1965 are traced back until they reach members of source populations, the mean over parameter sets of the expected number of genealogical lines terminating with African individuals is 314 (interquartile range 240–376), and the mean of the expected number terminating in Europeans is 51 (interquartile range 32–69)**. Across discrete generations, the peak number of African genealogical ancestors occurs in birth cohorts from the early 1700s, and the probability exceeds 50% that at least one European ancestor was born more recently than 1835. Our genealogical perspective can contribute to further understanding the admixture processes that underlie admixed populations. For African-Americans, the results provide insight both on how many of the ancestors of a typical African-American might have been forcibly displaced in the Transatlantic Slave Trade and on how many separate European admixture events might exist in a typical African-American genealogy.

### Wakeley et al. (2023): Recurrent mutation in the ancestry of a rare variant

Recurrent mutation produces multiple copies of the same allele which may be co-segregating in a population. Yet, most analyses of allele-frequency or site-frequency spectra assume that all observed copies of an allele trace back to a single mutation. We develop **a sampling theory for the number of latent mutations in the ancestry of a rare variant, specifically a variant observed in relatively small count in a large sample**. Our results follow from the statistical independence of low-count mutations, which we show to hold for the standard neutral coalescent or diffusion model of population genetics as well as for more general coalescent trees. **For populations of constant size, these counts are distributed like the number of alleles in the Ewens sampling formula**. We develop a Poisson sampling model for populations of varying size and illustrate it using new results for site-frequency spectra in an exponentially growing population. **We apply our model to a large data set of human SNPs and use it to explain dramatic differences in site-frequency spectra across the range of mutation rates in the human genome**.

## PLoS Biology

### Dagilis and Matute (2023): The fitness of an introgressing haplotype changes over the course of divergence and depends on its size and genomic location

The genomic era has made clear that introgression, or the movement of genetic material between species, is a common feature of evolution. Examples of both adaptive and deleterious introgression exist in a variety of systems. **What is unclear is how the fitness of an introgressing haplotype changes as species diverge or as the size of the introgressing haplotype changes**. In a simple model, we show that introgression may more easily occur into parts of the genome which have not diverged heavily from a common ancestor. The **key insight is that alleles from a shared genetic background are likely to have positive epistatic interactions, increasing the fitness of a larger introgressing block**. In regions of the genome where few existing substitutions are disrupted, this positive epistasis can be larger than incompatibilities with the recipient genome. Further, we show that **early in the process of divergence, introgression of large haplotypes can be favored more than introgression of individual alleles**. This model is consistent with observations of a positive relationship between recombination rate and introgression frequency across the genome; however, it generates several novel predictions. First, the model **suggests that the relationship between recombination rate and introgression may not exist, or may be negative, in recently diverged species pairs**. Furthermore, the model suggests that introgression that replaces existing derived variation will be more deleterious than introgression at sites carrying ancestral variants. These predictions are tested in an example of introgression in **Drosophila melanogaster**, with some support for both. **Finally, the model provides a potential alternative explanation to asymmetry in the direction of introgression, with expectations of higher introgression from rapidly diverged populations into slowly evolving ones**.

### Huang et al. (2023): Insights into the coexistence of birds and humans in cropland through meta-analyses of bird exclosure studies, crop loss mitigation experiments, and social surveys

Birds share lands with humans at a substantial scale and affect crops. Yet, at a global scale, systematic evaluations of human–bird coexistence in croplands are scarce. Here, we compiled and used meta-analysis approaches to synthesize multiple global datasets of ecological and social dimensions to understand this complex coexistence system. Our result shows that birds usually increase woody, but not herbaceous, crop production, implying that crop loss mitigation efforts are critical for a better coexistence. We reveal that many nonlethal technical measures are more effective in reducing crop loss, e.g., using scaring devices and changing sow practices, than other available methods. Besides, we find that stakeholders from low-income countries are more likely to perceive the crop losses caused by birds and are less positive toward birds than those from high-income ones. Based on our evidence, we identified potential regional clusters, particularly in tropical areas, for implementing win-win coexistence strategies. Overall, we provide an evidence-based knowledge flow and solutions for stakeholders to integrate the conservation and management of birds in croplands.

## PLoS Genetics

### Wolf et al. (2023): Characterizing the landscape of gene expression variance in humans

Gene expression variance has been linked to organismal function and fitness but remains a commonly neglected aspect of molecular research. As a result, we lack a comprehensive understanding of the patterns of transcriptional variance across genes, and how this variance is linked to context-specific gene regulation and gene function. Here, we use 57 large publicly available RNA-seq data sets to investigate the landscape of gene expression variance. These studies cover a wide range of tissues and allowed us to assess if there are consistently more or less variable genes across tissues and data sets and what mechanisms drive these patterns. We show that gene expression variance is broadly similar across tissues and studies, indicating that the pattern of transcriptional variance is consistent. We use this similarity to create both global and within-tissue rankings of variation, which we use to show that function, sequence variation, and gene regulatory signatures contribute to gene expression variance. Low-variance genes are associated with fundamental cell processes and have lower levels of genetic polymorphisms, have higher gene-gene connectivity, and tend to be associated with chromatin states associated with transcription. In contrast, high-variance genes are enriched for genes involved in immune response, environmentally responsive genes, immediate early genes, and are associated with higher levels of polymorphisms. These results show that the pattern of transcriptional variance is not noise. Instead, it is a consistent gene trait that seems to be functionally constrained in human populations. Furthermore, this commonly neglected aspect of molecular phenotypic variation harbors important information to understand complex traits and disease.

Author summary

Gene expression variance, or the variation in the level of gene expression within a population, can have significant impacts on physiology, disease, and evolutionary adaptations. While the average level of gene expression is typically the focus of research, the variation around this average level (i.e., gene expression variance) can also be important for understanding complex traits and disease. Here, we investigate the landscape of transcriptional variance across tissues, populations, and studies. Using large publicly available RNA-seq data sets, we were able to identify the general properties associated with high- and low-variance genes, as well as factors driving variation in variance across genes. Specifically, we uncovered gene expression variance was significantly associated with gene length, nucleotide diversity, the degree of connectivity and the presence of non-coding RNA. Our results suggest that the mechanisms responsible for maintaining optimal levels of variation in high- versus low-variance differ, and that this variability is the result of different patterns of selection.

## PNAS

### Youngfish et al. (2023): Demographic consequences of phenological asynchrony for North American songbirds

Changes in phenology—the timing of seasonal events—are among the most pronounced ecological responses to climate change. Scientists are concerned that differential phenological responses across trophic levels could have negative consequences for animal populations, but widespread evidence is lacking. Here, we present evidence of a link between reproductive productivity and the timing of both bird breeding and the arrival of spring across the North American continent. These findings, which are the broadest yet in extent, in conjunction with evidence that bird phenology is not keeping pace with climate change, suggest that future phenological change will likely result in negative demographic consequences for these birds.
Abstract

Changes in phenology in response to ongoing climate change have been observed in numerous taxa around the world. Differing rates of phenological shifts across trophic levels have led to concerns that ecological interactions may become increasingly decoupled in time, with potential negative consequences for populations. Despite widespread evidence of phenological change and a broad body of supporting theory, large-scale multitaxa evidence for demographic consequences of phenological asynchrony remains elusive. Using data from a continental-scale bird-banding program, we assess the impact of phenological dynamics on avian breeding productivity in 41 species of migratory and resident North American birds breeding in and around forested areas. We find strong evidence for a phenological optimum where breeding productivity decreases in years with both particularly early or late phenology and when breeding occurs early or late relative to local vegetation phenology. Moreover, we demonstrate that landbird breeding phenology did not keep pace with shifts in the timing of vegetation green-up over a recent 18-y period, even though avian breeding phenology has tracked green-up with greater sensitivity than arrival for migratory species. Species whose breeding phenology more closely tracked green-up tend to migrate shorter distances (or are resident over the entire year) and breed earlier in the season. These results showcase the broadest-scale evidence yet of the demographic impacts of phenological change. Future climate change–associated phenological shifts will likely result in a decrease in breeding productivity for most species, given that bird breeding phenology is failing to keep pace with climate change.

### Clark (2023): The inheritance of social status: England, 1600 to 2022

There is widespread belief across the social sciences in the ability of social interventions and social institutions to significantly influence rates of social mobility. In England, 1600 to 2022, we see considerable change in social institutions across time. Half the population was illiterate in 1800, and not until 1880 was compulsory primary education introduced. Progressively after this, educational provision and other social supports for poorer families expanded greatly. The paper shows, however, that these interventions did not change in any measurable way the strong familial persistence of social status across generations.
Abstract

A lineage of 422,374 English people (1600 to 2022) contains correlations in social outcomes among relatives as distant as 4th cousins. These correlations show striking patterns. The first is the strong persistence of social status across family trees. Correlations decline by a factor of only 0.79 across each generation. Even fourth cousins, with a common ancestor only five generations earlier, show significant status correlations. The second remarkable feature is that the decline in correlation with genetic distance in the lineage is unchanged from 1600 to 2022. Vast social changes in England between 1600 and 2022 would have been expected to increase social mobility. Yet people in 2022 remain correlated in outcomes with their lineage relatives in exactly the same way as in preindustrial England. The third surprising feature is that the correlations parallel those of a simple model of additive genetic determination of status, with a genetic correlation in marriage of 0.57.


### Scheper et al. (2023): Biodiversity and pollination benefits trade off against profit in an intensive farming system

Significance

Making agriculture more sustainable and environmentally friendly is one of the main routes to address the current global biodiversity crisis. Many studies have shown that enhancing biodiversity can boost agricultural production through the ecosystem services provided by wild species, but very little is known about the economic profitability of integrating biodiversity-friendly management into farming systems. Here, we show that reducing land-use intensity on agricultural grasslands benefits bee diversity and pollination service delivery, and produces up to 17% higher revenue on neighboring sunflower fields. However, the costs of reduced grassland forage yields consistently exceeded the economic benefits of enhanced pollination. Our results therefore suggest that the transition to biodiversity-friendly farming may require additional public or private financial incentives.
Abstract

Agricultural expansion and intensification have boosted global food production but have come at the cost of environmental degradation and biodiversity loss. Biodiversity-friendly farming that boosts ecosystem services, such as pollination and natural pest control, is widely being advocated to maintain and improve agricultural productivity while safeguarding biodiversity. A vast body of evidence showing the agronomic benefits of enhanced ecosystem service delivery represent important incentives to adopt practices enhancing biodiversity. However, the costs of biodiversity-friendly management are rarely taken into account and may represent a major barrier impeding uptake by farmers. Whether and how biodiversity conservation, ecosystem service delivery, and farm profit can go hand in hand is unknown. Here, we quantify the ecological, agronomic, and net economic benefits of biodiversity-friendly farming in an intensive grassland–sunflower system in Southwest France. We found that reducing land-use intensity on agricultural grasslands drastically enhances flower availability and wild bee diversity, including rare species. Biodiversity-friendly management on grasslands furthermore resulted in an up to 17% higher revenue on neighboring sunflower fields through positive effects on pollination service delivery. However, the opportunity costs of reduced grassland forage yields consistently exceeded the economic benefits of enhanced sunflower pollination. Our results highlight that profitability is often a key constraint hampering adoption of biodiversity-based farming and uptake critically depends on society’s willingness to pay for associated delivery of public goods such as biodiversity.


## Science Advances
- Podcast on hunter gatherers and the question of sex-biased activities

## Gözde: Super-conductivity at room pressure with ambient temperature. Korean group claiming to have found this.
- Other groups trying to replicate the study failed.
- How should one deal with preprints?