# Monthly Journal Review July 2023

Date: 3 July 2023
Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- PLoS Genetics (PLoS Genet)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
Nothing this month

## Genetics
Nothing this month

## PLoS Biol
Nothing this month

## PLoS Genet
Nothing this month 

## PNAS
- [Adaptive and maladaptive introgression in grapevine domestication](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2222041120)  
  grape breeding; machine learning; population genetics; structural variation; viticulture  
 &#x261E; *Pick*  
 Donikë
- [Historical plant introductions predict current insect invasions](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2221826120)  
  invasion debt; nonnative insects; nonnative plants; species flow; time lag  
  

- [Capturing patterns of evolutionary relatedness with reflectance spectra to model and monitor biodiversity](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2215533120)  
  biogeography; evolutionary biology; hyperspectral; lineage functional types; plant ecology  
  

- [Reductions in home-range size and social interactions among dehorned black rhinoceroses (Diceros bicornis)](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2301727120)  
  conservation; dehorning; home range; poaching; rhino  
 &#x261E; *Pick*  

- [Twins, income, and happiness: Evidence from China](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2221884120)  
  fixed effects; happiness; income; instrumental variables; twins  
 &#x261E; *Pick*  

- [The evolution of early hominin food production and sharing](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2218096120)  
  cooperation; extractive foraging; food sharing; human evolution; pair-bonds  

## Theor Popul Biol
Nothing this month


# Summary of Picks

### Xiao et al. (2023) PNAS: Adaptive and maladaptive introgression in grapevine domestication
- domesticated grapevines spread to Europe around 3,000 years ago
- time, mode, genomic pattern, and biological effects of these introgression events have not been investigated
- history of introgression between domesticated grapes and their European wild relative
- resequencing data from 345 samples spanning the distributional range of wild (Vitis vinifera ssp. sylvestris) and cultivated (V. vinifera ssp. vinifera) grapes
- machine learning–based population genetic analyses (scan for introgression [population branch statistic] and sweeps [shic])
- single domestication of grapevine with introgression from the wild relative to wine, but not to table, grapes: single domestication of grapevine, followed by continuous gene flow between European wild grapes (EU) and cultivated grapes over the past ~2,000 y, especially from EU to wine grapes
- regions are enriched for genes related to aromatic compound synthesis, suggesting that European wild grapes have been an important resource for improving the flavor of wine grapes
- beneficial effects of introgression carry a potential cost because introgressed regions have elevated numbers of putatively deleterious variants, which are usually maintained in a heterozygous state for this clonally propagated crop

### Duthé et al. (2023) PNAS: Reductions in home-range size and social interactions among dehorned black rhinoceroses (Diceros bicornis)
- illegal trade and tusks and horns --> decline of megaherbivores including the African black rhinoceros
- large-scale removal and trimming of rhinoceros horns by conservationists (preventive)
- reduction in poaching-induced mortality, but now also finding that preventive measure is affecting black rhino space use and interactions
- 10 South African reserves: black rhinos reduced home ranges and social encounters
- change in behavioural ecology might have demographic consequences (yet to be determined)
- important to consider behavioural response to conservation interventions when planning these

### Ye et al. (2023) PNAS: Twins, income, and happiness: Evidence from China
- fundamental question in economic, psychological, and social science: whether and hoch much income truly brings happiness
- study on identical Chinese twins, thus correcting for unobserved genetic factors that might impact income and happiness
- address measurement bias and robustness checks
- find an effect of income on happiness much larger than previous estimates: doubling the income boosts the four-scale happiness value by 0.26 scales (or 0.37 SDs)
- heterogeneity analyses: income matters most for males and the middle-aged
- emphasises the importance of income maintenance for individuals' well-being

# Picks by others

## Conservation Genetics
- Effects of local extinction on the effective population size of meta-population as a whole and of individual popultions

## Horticulture Research
- Chang et al. (2023) Meiosis in potatoes

## American Journal of Botany
- Delinger et al. (2023) Using geometric morphometrics to determine fittest phenotypes
- Louis et al. (2023) Role of two pollinators (hawkmoth and bees) in pollinating Oenothera. Two species are self-incompatible. Morphological match between pollinators and flowers. Gene flow between plant species. Genetic structure over 30 km: no genetic differentiation. On 30 to 60 km, there is strong genetic structure within the bee-pollinated species. Hawkmoth flies over much wider range compared to bees. Genetic marker indicating seed dispersal vs. pollen dispersal confirming lower dispersal in bee-pollinate plant species. Isolation by distance higher in bee-pollinated species. Pollen dispersal had a larger effect on genetic structure.
- Special issue on pollen as a link between pollen and fitness --> Elisabeth

## Lova 
- DNA barcoding in arthropodes living on cactuses. 30 different species living on these cactuses.
- Gene flow connecting leopard populations despite habitat fragmentation and hunting. Bayesian Inference of Migration Rates BIMr (microsatellites). See Slack.

## Molecular Biology and Evolution
- Obituary of M. Nei (passed away in late May 2023): Reminder of the book by him
- Bird song with a focus on consistency and repetition (vocal consistency), habituation. 'Reproductive success' assessed by female behaviour responding to male song.

## Science
- Liu et al. (2023) Hi-C and RNA sequencing: linking expression to DNA structure and chromatin interactions

## PLoS One
- Genome-wide study of linkage disequilibrium in Iranian sheeps
- PyCliBarcode: representation of the whole animal kingdom in the sequence space.

## BMC Evolution and Ecology
- Amphibians, disease, and climate change
- Freshwater fish: multilocus phylogeny of catfish