# Monthly Journal Review 13 February 2023

Date: 13 February 2023
Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
- [Statistical phasing of 150,119 sequenced genomes in the UK Biobank](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.11.008)  
  UK Biobank; genotype phasing; haplotype; haplotype phasing  
  

- [SDPRX: A statistical method for cross-population prediction of complex traits](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.11.007)  
  PRS; complex traits; cross-population; genome-wide association studies; polygenic risk score  
  

- [Genotype first: Clinical genomics research through a reverse phenotyping approach](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.12.004)  
  phenotypic ascertainment, genomic ascertainment, reverse phenotyping, predictive genomic medicine, genomic screening  

## Genetics
- Nothing this month

## PLoS Biol
- [Towards a unification of the 2 meanings of ``epigenetics"](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001944)  
  epigenetics, molecular epigenetics, epigenetic landscape  

## PNAS
- [Evolvability and trait function predict phenotypic divergence of plant populations](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2203228120)  
  adaptation; evolvability; genetic constraints; macroevolution  
 &#x261E; *Pick*  

- [The worldwide networks of spread of recorded alien species](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2201911120)  
  alien species; globalization; invasion dynamics; network; spread routes  
 &#x261E; *Pick*  

- [Mapping the connectivity-conflict interface to inform conservation](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2211482119)  
  Markov chains; coadaptation; dispersal; human-wildlife coexistence; landscape planning  
  

- [Natural selection of immune and metabolic genes associated with health in two lowland Bolivian populations](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2207544120)  
  Tsimane; evolution; genotype–phenotype; health; natural selection  

## Theor Popul Biol
- Nothing this month


# Summary of Picks

## Opendal et al. (2023) PNAS: Evolvability and trait function predict phenotypic divergence of plant populations

Variation in phenotypic traits among conspecific populations is common in nature and often, but not always, reflects adaptation to the local environment. Although natural selection is a potent force driving local adaptation, the genetic architecture of complex phenotypes can both slow down and deflect the approach of populations to their local adaptive optima. We compiled and analyzed a large database of population divergence in phenotypic traits paired with estimates of standing genetic variation (evolvability) within populations to reveal consistent positive relationships between evolutionary divergence and evolvability. When combined with data on trait function, evolvability estimates explain ~40% of the variation in population divergence. These results demonstrate substantial predictability of trait divergence and are consistent with genetic constraints on evolutionary divergence.

Some studies suggest that trait divergence is highly constrained by genetic variances and covariances of complex phenotypes.

We analyze a large database of population divergence in plants and evaluate whether evolutionary divergence scales positively with standing genetic variation within populations (evolvability), as expected if genetic constraints are evolutionarily important.

We further evaluate differences in divergence and evolvability–divergence relationships between reproductive and vegetative traits and between selfing, mixed-mating, and outcrossing species, as these factors are expected to influence both patterns of selection and evolutionary potentials.

Evolutionary divergence scaled positively with evolvability. Furthermore, trait divergence was greater for vegetative traits than for floral (reproductive) traits, but largely independent of the mating system.

The consistency of the evolvability–divergence relationships across diverse species suggests substantial predictability of trait divergence. The results are also consistent with genetic constraints playing a role in evolutionary divergence.

## Capinha et al. (2023) PNAS: The worldwide networks of spread of recorded alien species

Identifying whether alien species follow similar spatiotemporal spread patterns as they disperse across the world could help guide transnational cooperation and national efforts for the prevention of biological invasions. Whether such cross-taxonomic patterns of spread exist remained hitherto unknown. Here, we show that these patterns exist and are characterized by the early presence of alien species in a few countries, playing central roles in the global trade network, followed by radiative spread into geographically close countries with similar climates. This supports a hierarchical type of spread, where some countries act as major dispersal hubs and determine global invasion routes. These findings help to identify high-risk countries as hubs of biological invasions.