# Monthly Journal Review 8 May 2023

Date: 8 May 2023
Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- PLoS Genetics (PLoS Genet)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
- [Fast and accurate Bayesian polygenic risk modeling with variational inference](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.03.009)  
  Bayesian model; GWAS; UK Biobank; polygenic risk score; spike and slab; variational inference

## Genetics
- [Genetic association models are robust to common population kinship estimation biases](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyad030)  
  estimation bias; genetic association studies; kinship matrices; linear mixed-effects models; principal components analysis  
  *Pick*  
  Lukas

- [Hybrid inferiority and genetic incompatibilities drive divergence of fungal pathogens infecting the same host](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyad037)  
  Pyrenophora teres ; Dobzhansky--Muller incompatibilities; barley; fungal genomics; genetic crosses; net blotch; speciation  
  Donikë

## PLoS Biol
- Nothing this month

## PLoS Genet
- [Imputed genomes and haplotype-based analyses of the Picts of early medieval Scotland reveal fine-scale relatedness between Iron Age, early medieval and the modern people of the UK](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1010360)  
  Humans; Female; Haplotypes; Scotland; DNA, Mitochondrial; Gene Frequency, Picts, ancient DNA  
  *Pick*  

- [Heterozygous inversion breakpoints suppress meiotic crossovers by altering recombination repair outcomes](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1010702)  
  Animals; Drosophila melanogaster; Recombinational DNA Repair; Chromosome Inversion; DNA Repair; Gene Conversion; Crossing Over, Genetic; Meiosis  

## PNAS
- [Conservation management strategy impacts inbreeding and mutation load in scimitar-horned oryx](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2210756120)  
  deleterious mutations; effective population size; ex situ populations; reintroduction; runs of homozygosity (ROH)  
  *Pick*  
  Lukas
 
- [Ancient DNA from a lost Negev Highlands desert grape reveals a Late Antiquity wine lineage](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2213563120)  
  Late Antiquity; Negev Highlands; ancient DNA; archaeobotany; viticulture  
  
- [Elephants as an animal model for self-domestication](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2208607120)  
  cross-species comparisons; elephants; evolution; prosociality; self-domestication  
  
- [Genetic factors predict hybrid formation in the British flora](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2220261120)  
  DNA barcoding; floristic; genetic distance; hybrid  
  
- [Epistatic QTLs for yield heterosis in tomato](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2205787119)  
  breeding; epistasis; heterosis; tomato; QTL  

See also the PNAS Special Feature on "Harnessing Crop Diversity": https://www.pnas.org/toc/pnas/120/14

## Theor Popul Biol
- Nothing this month


# Summary of Picks

## Hou et al. (2023) Genetics. Genetic association models are robust to common population kinship estimation biases

Common **genetic association** models for structured populations, including principal component analysis (**PCA**) and linear mixed-effects models (**LMMs**), model the **correlation structure between individuals using population kinship matrices**, also known as **genetic relatedness matrices**. However, the most common kinship estimators can have severe biases that were only recently determined. Here we characterize the effect of these kinship biases on genetic association. We employ a large simulated admixed family and genotypes from the 1000 Genomes Project, both with simulated traits, to evaluate key kinship estimators. Remarkably, we find practically invariant association statistics for kinship matrices of different bias types (matching all other features). We then prove using statistical theory and linear algebra that LMM association tests are invariant to these kinship biases, and PCA approximately so. Our proof shows that the intercept and relatedness effect coefficients compensate for the kinship bias, an argument that extends to generalized linear models. As a corollary, association testing is also invariant to changing the reference ancestral population of the kinship matrix. Lastly, we observed that all kinship estimators, except for popkin ratio-of-means, can give improper non-positive semidefinite matrices, which can be problematic although some LMMs handle them surprisingly well, and condition numbers can be used to choose kinship estimators. Overall, we find that existing association studies are robust to kinship estimation bias, and our calculations may help improve association methods by taking advantage of this unexpected robustness, as well as help determine the effects of kinship bias in related problems.


## Morez et al. (2023) PLoS Genetics. Imputed genomes and haplotype-based analyses of the Picts of early medieval Scotland reveal fine-scale relatedness between Iron Age, early medieval and the modern people of the UK

Abstract

There are longstanding questions about the origins and ancestry of the Picts of early medieval Scotland (ca. 300–900 CE), prompted in part by exotic medieval origin myths, their enigmatic symbols and inscriptions, and the meagre textual evidence. The Picts, first mentioned in the late 3rd century CE resisted the Romans and went on to form a powerful kingdom that ruled over a large territory in northern Britain. In the 9th and 10th centuries Gaelic language, culture and identity became dominant, transforming the Pictish realm into Alba, the precursor to the medieval kingdom of Scotland. To date, no comprehensive analysis of Pictish genomes has been published, and questions about their biological relationships to other cultural groups living in Britain remain unanswered. Here we present two high-quality Pictish genomes (2.4 and 16.5X coverage) from central and northern Scotland dated from the 5th-7th century which we impute and co-analyse with >8,300 previously published ancient and modern genomes. Using allele frequency and haplotype-based approaches, we can firmly place the genomes within the Iron Age gene pool in Britain and demonstrate regional biological affinity. We also demonstrate the presence of population structure within Pictish groups, with Orcadian Picts being genetically distinct from their mainland contemporaries. When investigating Identity-By-Descent (IBD) with present-day genomes, we observe broad affinities between the mainland Pictish genomes and the present-day people living in western Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and Northumbria, but less with the rest of England, the Orkney islands and eastern Scotland—where the political centres of Pictland were located. The pre-Viking Age Orcadian Picts evidence a high degree of IBD sharing across modern Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland, and the Orkney islands, demonstrating substantial genetic continuity in Orkney for the last ~2,000 years. Analysis of mitochondrial DNA diversity at the Pictish cemetery of Lundin Links (n = 7) reveals absence of direct common female ancestors, with implications for broader social organisation. Overall, our study provides novel insights into the genetic affinities and population structure of the Picts and direct relationships between ancient and present-day groups of the UK.

Author summary

We report two high-quality autosomal and eight mitochondrial genomes sequenced from individuals associated with the Pictish period of early medieval Scotland (ca. 300–900 CE). We demonstrate genetic affinities between the Pictish genomes and Iron Age people who lived in Britain, which supports current archaeological theories of a local origin. The autosomal genomes also allowed us to detect haplotype sharing between the Pictish genomes and present-day Europeans. Our results demonstrate a proportionally higher degree of haplotype sharing, and thus genetic affinity, between the Pictish genomes and individuals from western Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and Northumbria. We also detected genetic structure in Scotland during the Iron Age, likely driven by the combination of genetic drift and small population size, which we also detect in present-day Orcadians. Lastly, the seven mitochondrial DNA from the Lundin Links cemetery showed that these individuals had no direct maternal ancestors which could suggest exchanges of people, or at least females, between groups during the Pictish period, challenging older ideas that the Picts were a matrilineal society. Overall, our results show that high-quality ancient genomes combined with haplotype imputation are highly informative for obtaining novel insights to population structure and migration over the past 2,000 years.

## Humble et al. (2023) PNAS. Conservation management strategy impacts inbreeding and mutation load in scimitar-horned oryx

Significance
Conservation genetic management is becoming increasingly important for safeguarding and restoring wildlife populations. Understanding how the intensity of intervention influences genomic components of fitness is therefore essential for supporting species viability. We investigate the impact of contrasting management strategies on the genomic landscape of inbreeding and mutation load in captive populations of the scimitar-horned oryx. We reveal how several decades of management have prevented the formation of long runs of homozygosity and masked the expression of deleterious mutations. Our findings highlight the dynamics between inbreeding, mutation load, and population size and have direct implications for future management of threatened species.

Abstract
In an age of habitat loss and overexploitation, small populations, both captive and wild, are increasingly facing the effects of isolation and inbreeding. Genetic management has therefore become a vital tool for ensuring population viability. However, little is known about how the type and intensity of intervention shape the genomic landscape of inbreeding and mutation load. We address this using whole-genome sequence data of the scimitar-horned oryx (Oryx dammah), an iconic antelope that has been subject to contrasting management strategies since it was declared extinct in the wild. We show that unmanaged populations are enriched for long runs of homozygosity (ROH) and have significantly higher inbreeding coefficients than managed populations. Additionally, despite the total number of deleterious alleles being similar across management strategies, the burden of homozygous deleterious genotypes was consistently higher in unmanaged groups. These findings emphasize the risks associated with deleterious mutations through multiple generations of inbreeding. As wildlife management strategies continue to diversify, our study reinforces the importance of maintaining genome-wide variation in vulnerable populations and has direct implications for one of the largest reintroduction attempts in the world.

## Picks by others
Nina
- Using the microbiome for conservation biology. Closeness to human populations affects gut microbiome of Galapagos penguins and presence of microbiotics resistance.

Glauco
- Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Bird nest location based on Street View
- Molecular Ecology. Genomic health of populations dependent on demographic history

Iris
- Biological Conservation: monitoring wild cat genetics (by Beatrice); abundance and introgression; introgression increased, gene flow from domesticated cats increased; abundance increased.
- Heredity: Commons ... vacquita. Debate about extinction and load.
- ... ROH and effects by selection and demographic history. Pemberton group. Population history has a greater effect on ROH than do selection and recombination.

Thomas
- Am. J. Botany by Breths and Smiths: Transition of SI to SC during life time. Transition is context dependent (pollination from foreign or self pollen).
- Davis et al. Genes Genomes Genetics: New whole-genome sequence of *Brassica nappis*
- Liao et al. G3: Impact of mutation type on site-frequency spectrum and population-genetic inference. Flanking nucleotides determine mutation type. Assuming interchangeability of mutation types might bias SFS-based demographic inference.
- Smith and Weissman D. G3: Isolation by distance in populations with power-law dispersal. Limited dispersal -> isolation by distance. Stepping-stone model is often assumed. But what happens with long-distance dispersal? Coalescent simulation and theory to model and study the effect of long-range dispersal. Power-law decay of IBD. Different decay rates across different geographic scales.
- Horticulture Research: Gai et al. Multiple-model GWAS and QTL for malic acid --> follow up on this one.

Anne
- BMC Ecology and Evolution: 
    - Plant–pollinator interaction and the impact of pesticides
    - Plants under pressure: evolution and ecology
    - Comparative analysis of amaranthus genomics

Gözde
- Has four journals, but no interesting papers this months
    - Epigenetic aging in plants (methylation)
- Nature: New type of organelle in *Drosophila* intestine involved in phosphoplipid metabolism