# Monthly Journal Review 6 March 2023

Date: 6 March 2023
Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- PLoS Genetics (PLoS Genet)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
- [Australian Genomics: Outcomes of a 5-year national program to accelerate the integration of genomics in healthcare](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.01.018). Stark et al. **Australian Genomics, national partnerships, healthcare, genomic testing, disease, cancer, policy, clinical genomics**


## Genetics
- Nothing this month

## PLoS Biol
- [Fostering science-art collaborations: A toolbox of resources](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001992). Chappell and Muglia. **science-art collaboration, creativity, curiosity, community page** *Pick*

## PLoS Genet
- [Stepwise recombination suppression around the mating-type locus in an ascomycete fungus with self-fertile spores](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1010347). Vittorelli et al. **recombination, recombination suppression, ascomycetes, mating-type locus**
- [Long divergent haplotypes introgressed from wild sheep are associated with distinct morphological and adaptive characteristics in domestic sheep](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1010615). Cheng et al. **Ovis aries, domestic sheep, introgression, Iranian mouflon, urial, argali, morphology, recombination** *Pick*

## PNAS
- [Estimating human mobility in Holocene Western Eurasia with large-scale ancient genomic data](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2218375120). Schmid and Schiffels. **Gaussian process regression; aDNA; mobility estimation; prehistory; human demographic history** *Pick*
- [How to expand solar power without using precious land](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2301355120). S. Battersby. **solar power, land use, biodiversity, farming, crop yield**

## Theor Popul Biol
- Nothing this month


# Summary of Picks

## Chappell and Muglia (2023) PNAS. Fostering science–art collaborations: A toolbox of resources

Abstract
Scientists and artists are both motivated by creativity and curiosity, and science and art can be mutually reinforcing, supporting discovery and innovation. This Community Page highlights resources for individuals, groups, and institutions to advance science–art collaborations.

Summary
- Scientists and artists are both motivated by creativity and curiosity. Science and art can be mutually reinforcing.
- The authors present resources for individuals, groups and institutions to advance science–art collaborations.
- Aesthetic products (posters, paintings, talks, plays) to help better understand the world and tranfser content.
- Common toolbox of cognitive approaches
- Art allows explore scientific questions and communicate hypotheses and findings in novel ways
- Examples: obsidian tools, classic Japanese illustrated monographs
- Synergy rather than dualistic view
- Outputs: papers, exhibitions, inventions, performances
- Units: academic institutions, researchers, designers, community spaces, museums, homes, gardens
- Funders: private philanthropy, local infrastructure, government investment
- Suggestions
    - Individuals
        - Expand creative practices in research
        - Graphic illustrations (as the tip of the iceberg)
        - Sonification of data
        - Collaboration with artists, musicians, and educators
    - Groups
    - Institutions
        - Transdisciplinary collaborations
        - Reform the metrics used to assess success in trainees and faculty
        - Venues for transdisciplinary training
        - Support PhD students in pursuing non-research activities (e.g. art–science exhibitions, community-engaged work, development of a science communication protocol)
        - Transdisciplinary products seen as contributions to the tenure evaluation process
        - Value and celebrate "non-traditional" dissemination of scientific products (e.g. in museums, on a website)
        - Provide spaces for art–science collaborations (catalytic collaborative spaces)
        - Transdisciplinary maker/lab/studio spaces
- STEM: Science, technology, engineering, and mathematics

## Cheng et al. (2023) PLoS Genet. Long divergent haplotypes introgressed from wild sheep are associated with distinct morphological and adaptive characteristics in domestic sheep

Abstract
The worldwide sheep population comprises more than 1000 breeds. Together, these exhibit a considerable morphological diversity, which has not been extensively investigated at the molecular level. Here, we analyze whole-genome sequencing individuals of 1,098 domestic sheep from 154 breeds, and 69 wild sheep from seven Ovis species. On average, we detected 6.8%, 1.0% and 0.2% introgressed sequence in domestic sheep originating from Iranian mouflon, urial and argali, respectively, with rare introgressions from other wild species. Interestingly, several introgressed haplotypes contributed to the morphological differentiations across sheep breeds, such as a RXFP2 haplotype from Iranian mouflon conferring the spiral horn trait, a MSRB3 haplotype from argali strongly associated with ear morphology, and a VPS13B haplotype probably originating from urial and mouflon possibly associated with facial traits. Our results reveal that introgression events from wild Ovis species contributed to the high rate of morphological differentiation in sheep breeds, but also to individual variation within breeds. We propose that long divergent haplotypes are a ubiquitous source of phenotypic variation that allows adaptation to a variable environment, and that these remain intact in the receiving population probably due to reduced recombination.

Significance
Introgression, introducing beneficial alleles from wild relatives, has been repeatedly proved to play important roles in adaptation to various environments during animal domestication and subsequent breeds formation. Several adaptive introgressions have been reported in domestic sheep, however, the systemic exploration is still lacking. Using a collection of more than 1000 individuals including 154 domestic breeds and seven wild relatives, we describe the genomic introgression spectrum across worldwide domestic sheep. Interestingly, we found several functional genes associated with morphological traits located in the introgressed regions. Besides, the frequency of highly divergent haplotypes in numerous introgressed regions are quite different among domestic breeds, indicating selection acted on these fragments. We speculated that the introgressed fragments contribute to the fast morphological differentiation of ~1,400 distinct domestic breeds. Deciphering the phenotypic variations in response to different introgressed haplotypes can reflect underlying breeding mechanisms. Overall, our work proves the important effect of introgression on sheep breeding, and shows how introgression, selection and recombination shape the genetic and phenotypic diversity.

Summary
- More than 1000 sheep breeds exhibiting large morphological diversity that has not been extensively investigated at the molecular level.
- Analysed WGS data from 1,098 domestic sheep individuals from 154 breeds, and 69 wild sheep from seven *Ovis* species.
- Detected 6.8, 1.0, and 0.2% introgressed sequence in domestic sheep originating from Iranian mouflon, urial, and argali
- Several introgressed haplotypes contributed to morphological differentiations across sheep breeds, e.g. an *RXFP2* haplotype from Iranian mouflon conferring the spiral horn trait, or a VPS13B haplotype probably originating from urial and mouflon associated with facial traits.
- Shown that introgression from wild species contributed to morphological differentiation among sheep breeds, and to variation within breeds.
- Speculate that long introgressed haplotypes might have remained intact when conveying an adaptive advantage (via selective pressure to reduce recombination).
- Methods
    - Fst in windows, permutation test (random subdivision into two groups)
    - Introgression at population scale: D statistics with Dsuite across combinations of populations based on population tree constructed with Treemix. D and f statistics for each branch of the population tree
    - Local ancestry inference using LOTER along genome
    - Modified f-statistic ($f_d$) in sliding windows and $d_{xy}$ in sliding windows
    - Haplotype networks and focal SNP-genotype frequencies in regions that showed up in introgression screens
    - GWAS for ear length and width, birth weight, and age

    
## Schmid and Schiffels (2023) PNAS. Estimating human mobility in Holocene Western Eurasia with large-scale ancient genomic data

Significance

Ancient human DNA (aDNA) extracted from archaeological contexts allows reconstructing past population movements. Previous methods work by calculating proportions of shared ancestry among individuals or groups in order to answer specific, regional research questions. Here, we propose a large-scale algorithm to quantify human mobility through time and space using bulk aDNA data. The algorithm has two core components: i) interpolation of the spatiotemporal distribution of genetic ancestry to obtain a continuous ancestry information field and ii) probabilistic estimation of a spatial genetic similarity surface for each input sample by projecting its ancestry profile into this field. We apply this to thousands of published genomic samples in the last 10,000 y to trace diachronic mobility patterns in Western Eurasia.
Abstract

The recent increase in openly available ancient human DNA samples allows for large-scale meta-analysis applications. Trans-generational past human mobility is one of the key aspects that ancient genomics can contribute to since changes in genetic ancestry—unlike cultural changes seen in the archaeological record—necessarily reflect movements of people. Here, we present an algorithm for spatiotemporal mapping of genetic profiles, which allow for direct estimates of past human mobility from large ancient genomic datasets. The key idea of the method is to derive a spatial probability surface of genetic similarity for each individual in its respective past. This is achieved by first creating an interpolated ancestry field through space and time based on multivariate statistics and Gaussian process regression and then using this field to map the ancient individuals into space according to their genetic profile. We apply this algorithm to a dataset of 3138 aDNA samples with genome-wide data from Western Eurasia in the last 10,000 y. Finally, we condense this sample-wise record with a simple summary statistic into a diachronic measure of mobility for subregions in Western, Central, and Southern Europe. For regions and periods with sufficient data coverage, our similarity surfaces and mobility estimates show general concordance with previous results and provide a meta-perspective of genetic changes and human mobility.