{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2761
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue0;\red9\green79\blue209;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0\cname textColor;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c0\c40784\c85490;
}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf2 From: genetics-gsa@msubmit.net\
Subject: GENETICS-2024-307195 - Reviewer Thank You\
Date: 25 August 2024 at 07:34:54 CEST\
To: saeschbacher@mac.com\
Reply-To: genetics-gsa@thegsajournals.org\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec3 August 25, 2024\
GENETICS-2024-307195\
The persistence of locally adapted polymorphisms under mutation swamping\
Takahiro Sakamoto\
James Whiting\
Sam Yeaman\
\
\
Dear Dr. Aeschbacher:\
\
Thank you very much for your review of "The persistence of locally adapted polymorphisms under mutation swamping" by Sakamoto et al. [Paper #GENETICS-2024-307195], which we have successfully received. A copy of your review is attached below for your reference. \
\
The Editors appreciate the time and effort you devoted to this important task. Your efforts are well-invested in GENETICS because all decisions on manuscripts are made by editors who are practicing scientists based on your and other reviewers' recommendations.\
\
If you have not done so already, please update your profile and areas of expertise now: {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://genetics.msubmit.net/cgi-bin/main.plex?el=A3NR5GSw1A5aA6a6A9ftdyb00ybp4DsO1POwbQOcCgZ"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 https://genetics.msubmit.net/cgi-bin/main.plex?el=A3NR5GSw1A5aA6a6A9ftdyb00ybp4DsO1POwbQOcCgZ}}\
\
Thanks for your service to our community!\
\
Sincerely, \
\
Nicholas Barton\
Senior Editor\
GENETICS\
\
\
----------------------------------------------------------------------- \
Subject: GENETICS-2024-307195 - Editorial Decision\
\
August 25, 2024 \
\
GENETICS-2024-307195 \
The persistence of locally adapted polymorphisms under mutation swamping \
\
Dear Dr. Sakamoto: \
\
Two experts in the field have reviewed your manuscript, and I have read it as well. While both the reviewers and I find your work interesting and potentially suitable for this journal, some definitions and the terms used, and the approximations made need to be clarified. You can read all the reviews at the end of this email. \
\
We look forward to receiving your revised manuscript. Please let the editorial office know approximately how long you expect to need for revisions. \
\
Upon resubmission, please include: \
1. A clean version of your manuscript; \
2. A marked version of your manuscript in which you highlight significant revisions carried out in response to the major points raised by the editor/reviewers (track changes is acceptable if preferred); \
3. A detailed response to the editor's/reviewers' feedback and to the concerns listed above. Please reference line numbers in this response to aid the editor and reviewers. \
\
Your paper will likely be sent back out for review. \
\
Additionally, please ensure that your resubmission is formatted for GENETICS {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://academic.oup.com/genetics/pages/general-instructions"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 https://academic.oup.com/genetics/pages/general-instructions}} \
\
Follow this link to submit the revised manuscript: Link Not Available \
\
Sincerely, \
\
Kavita Jain \
Associate Editor \
GENETICS \
\
\
Approved by: \
Nicholas Barton \
Senior Editor \
GENETICS \
\
-------------------------------------------------------------------- \
\
\
Reviewer #2 (Comments for the Authors (Required)): \
\
This paper analyzes the evolution of genetic architecture of a quantitative trait under migration and mutation by simulations and diffusion approximations of a two-population model. The impact of migration is well established. This paper, however, concentrates on the effect of mutation. The model consists of a focal locus of large effect and many background loci of small effects. The focus is on the transition from a \'84concentrated" state of the genetic architecture to a \'84transient" one when mutation rate increases (while migration rate is fixed) , i.e. from a diverged major gene to a state where no divergence is maintained at any locus in the genome. They find that for the transition to occur a threshold mutation rate (formula (10)) exists for intermediate migration rates, which must be exceeded. \
\
I find this paper interesting for population genetic reasons (including the diffusion approach). Yet, what makes it particularly appealing to me is that it touches on the field of pattern formation (here genetic architecture formation), which is common in other areas of science including biology (e.g. developmental biology), but virtually neglected in population genetics. Unfortunately, this aspect is not discussed in this paper and should definitely be mentioned before publication. \
\
My other comments refer to the presentation. \
\
p. 3, Figure 1: The authors used a continent-island model. This should be made clear in the upper part of this figure. To me, it currently looks like an asymmetric island model (with two islands). \
\
p. 4: The last term on the rhs of Eq. (3) does not occur in the papers cited and should be mentioned in the explanation of this equation. \
\
p. 4 and following pages: The authors call inequalities \'84equations" (e.g. equation (4)). This should be changed. \
\
p. 4 and on: The interpretation of their mathematical formulas is often unclear. For example in the text under expressions (4) and (5), they write: Equation (4) explains why ... does not evolve at a high mutation rate. However, (4) does not even contain the mutation parameter. \
\
p. 8, lines 16-19: Jain and Stephan (Genetics 206, 389-406, 2017) were first analyzing the importance of the mutation rate regarding the occurrence of sweeps at a few loci versus small shifts at many loci. \
\
p. 13: The rhs of M1(x, gamma) should be explained. \
\
\
\
\
Reviewer #3 (Comments for the Authors (Required)): \
\
Please see my comments in the attached PDF. \
\
\
\
\
Associate Editor Comments: \
\
Here are some comments that could help to improve the MS: \
\
p.2, l.80: which model? I am assuming Wright-Fisher but you should clearly specify. \
\
Eqn 1: z defined later, should be defined below (1) \
\
Eqn 2: mention that y2 is given by (8) below \
\
p. 4, col 1: `Dynamics' at the focal locus - But dynamics are not studied, I suggest to say Equilibrium state/frequency (ditto comment for p. 5) \
\
p.4, p.5: Why is the focal locus frequency modeled deterministically but background stochastically? Pls explain. \
\
Eqn 6: Explain (6) in words, it is not clear why the integral of x tau_2 gives the mean equilibrium frequency [that is, the analog of p2^* in (2)] \
\
Eqn 6: The sojourn time calculation assumes that the directional selection term in (3) is absent. Justify. \
\
Notation seems inconsistent. You seem to use asterisk for stable equilibrium for p2, but not in (9) and (10)? \
\
\
\
}