{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1265\cocoasubrtf210
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf2 From: jen@molecol.com\
Subject: Decision for MER-14-0268, Molecular Ecology Resources\
Date: 9 August 2014 22:12:35 GMT-7\
To: jen@molecol.com\
\
10-Aug-2014\
\
Dear Reviewer,\
\
A decision of 'Reject' has been rendered for 'Kernel-beta: A novel non-parametric method for model choice in approximate Bayesian computation', which you recently reviewed for Molecular Ecology Resources. \'a0The comments of all reviewers and the decision letter are included at the bottom of this email.\
\
Your participation in the peer-review process is critical to the journal's success and directly impacts the quality of the research we publish. \'a0We appreciate your assistance with the evaluation of the manuscript and hope that we may contact you for assistance with future submissions falling within your areas of interest and expertise.\
\
All the best,\
\
Dr. Jennifer Gow\
Managing Editor, Molecular Ecology Resources\
jen@molecol.com\
\
\
Decision letter in full:\
10-Aug-2014\
\
Dear Dr. Sandoval-Castellanos:\
\
Your manuscript entitled 'Kernel-beta: A novel non-parametric method for model choice in approximate Bayesian computation' has now been reviewed and assessed by an Editor. Their comments are included below. On the basis of this advice I regret to inform you that your manuscript is not acceptable for publication in Molecular Ecology Resources. The Subject Editor has also indicated that it is unlikely that the present manuscript could be improved to the point of acceptability. I cannot, therefore, encourage you to resubmit a revised version of this manuscript to Molecular Ecology Resources.\
\
I know you will be disappointed with this negative response, but I hope the comments below will be of help.\
\
Thank you for considering Molecular Ecology Resources for the publication of your research. I hope the outcome of this specific paper will not discourage you from the submission of future manuscripts.\
\
All the best,\
\
Dr. Jennifer Gow\
Managing Editor, Molecular Ecology Resources\
6270 University Blvd\
Vancouver, BC\
V6T 1Z4\
Canada\
E-mail: jen@molecol.com\
\
Editor Comments to Author:\
\
Both reviewers strongly criticise the presentation and language, which makes the method proposed here hard to understand unambiguously. \'a0More important, they have substantial concerns over the justification for the method, and do not see a substantial advance over existing practice. \'a0Therefore, even if the problems with presentation were addressed, I do not believe that this paper would be publishable in ME Resources.\
\
Yours sincerely,\
\
Prof. Nick Barton\
Subject Editor, Molecular Ecology Resources\
\
\
Reviewer Comments to Author:\
Reviewer: 1\
\
Recommendation: Reject, encourage resubmission\
\
Comments:\
I am a statistician by training, I am familiar with ABC methods (even though I never worked on or even used any ABC method myself), this said, I found this paper very difficult to follow. \
The introduction and the Material and Method section read like a technical review or a discussion. \
The exact steps involved in (the flavour of) the ABC method considered here are not stated clearly, the notation is not clearly defined, all specific information about the algorithm are drawned in long paragraphs of mix bibliographic comments. \
The first formal descirption of an algorithm is found p. 9. After giving up on understanding anything beyond this point, I tried to start from scratch again from this algorithm description but it does not stand alone and after reading it, I was still at loss to understand what was the idea proposed here. \
\
I did not read the ms after \'a0the Material and Method section.\
\
In its current form, this manuscript will be useless to the vast majority of readers of MEC who are not familar with the detail of ABC methods. \
\
I would suggest to re-write completely this manuscript stating as early as possible with some clear notation what is the generic algorithm considered and how it is intended to improve it. \
\
\
Minor comments.\
\
p.3 l.74 "a direct approach, where acceptance proportions are directly operated as model likelihoods" Unclear\
\
p.5 l. 102 "The regression methods are powerful and mathematically solid." blank statement.\
\
p.6 l 123 "x is the observed data, s and s\'92 are the simulated and observed summary statistics" \
awkawrd -> x is the observed data, s and s\'92 are the \'a0observed and simulated summary statistics\
\
p. 6 l.122 "In the direct approach the model likelihoods are equivalent to the acceptance ratios (pi, pj)" needs reference\
\
p.6 l. 129 "the model likelihoods are the proportions that the different models have on the point that correspond to the values of the observed summary statistics." \'a0does not read well.\
\
\
Additional Questions:\
Quality of Science: n/a\
\
Importance of Science: n/a\
\
Quality of Presentation: Writing lacks clarity, methods and ideas are hard to follow\
\
Does this manuscript require significant reduction in length? If 'Yes", please indicate where shortening is required in your specific comments: No\
\
Does the Data Accessibility section list all the datasets needed to recreate the results in the manuscript? If \'91No\'92, please specify which additional data are needed in your comments to the authors.: I didn't check\
\
\
\
\
Reviewer: 2\
\
Recommendation: Reject\
\
Comments:\
Please find detailed comments in the attached PDF.\
\
Additional Questions:\
Quality of Science: Weak, major flaws or inconsistencies\
\
Importance of Science: Methods or DNA resources only of use to the authors or others in their group; method represents only slight modification of existing techniques\
\
Quality of Presentation: Writing lacks clarity, methods and ideas are hard to follow\
\
Does this manuscript require significant reduction in length? If 'Yes", please indicate where shortening is required in your specific comments: No\
\
Does the Data Accessibility section list all the datasets needed to recreate the results in the manuscript? If \'91No\'92, please specify which additional data are needed in your comments to the authors.: No\
\
\
\
\
Reviewer: 3\
\
Recommendation: Reject\
\
Comments:\
Model choice using ABC has received considerable attention recently, and is viewed as being more challenging than ABC based parameter estimation. The main reason for this is the lack of robustness of approximate Bayesian model selection with respect to the choice of summary statistics.\
\
The author considers this fairly challenging problem. \'a0As in the classical model choice approach (see for instance Beaumont et al. (2002), Didelot et al. (2011), or Toni and Stumpf (2010)), the author proposes to obtain estimates of the model Bayes factors. The first step consists of classical ABC rejection sampling. \'a0Then the model evidence is estimated by a kernel weighted average of the accepted models. The weighting is done based on the distance between the observed and the simulated summary statistics.\
It seems plausible that this approach can lead to a slight improvement of the standard ABC model choice algorithm without kernel weights. However, the methodological innovation seems both obvious and minor: Indeed, the classical approach can be viewed as a method that uses a uniform kernel function, while the current manuscript boils down to the use of more sophisticated kernel functions such as the Epanechnikov kernel. (See the proposed algorithm on lines 191-202.) It is generally believed that the influence of the choice of the kernel function is less crucial, compared to that of the acceptance threshold and of the chosen summary statistics.\
\
As in the above mentioned publications, the author proposes to use Bayes factors for model selection. While this is common practice in Bayesian statistics, there have been doubts more recently whether this is also justified with ABC. As discussed in Robert et al. (2011), the Bayes factors estimated by ABC are quite sensitive with respect to the chosen summary statistics. \
\
Overall, it might be argued that the manuscript provides a minor improvement of a meanwhile outdated approach.\
\
Minor Comments:\
The terminology used by the authors is sometimes a bit unusual: For instance \'93punctual estimations\'94 instead of point estimates (p. 10 & 11), or \\beta_1 = D_i on line 233 (\\beta does not depend on the model in this notation)\
The use of a spelling checker is recommended.\
\
References\
Beaumont, M.A., Zhang W., Balding, D.J. (2002)\
Approximate Bayesian Computation in Population Genetics\
Genetics 162, 4, 2025-2035.\
Toni, T. and Stumpf, M. (2010). \
Simulation-based model selection for dynamical systems in systems and population biology.\
Bioinformatics, 26, 104-110.\
Didelot, X., Everitt, R., Johansen, A. and Lawson, D. (2011).\
Likelihood-free estimation of model evidence.\
Bayesian Analysis,6, 1-28.\
Robert, C., Cornuet, J.M., Marin, J.M., and Pillai, N. (2011)\
Lack of confidence in ABC model choice.\
PNAS 108(37): 15112-15117.\
\
\
Additional Questions:\
Quality of Science: Mostly competent, but suffering from flaws of a technical or methodological nature\
\
Importance of Science: Methods or DNA resources only of use to the authors or others in their group; method represents only slight modification of existing techniques\
\
Quality of Presentation: Ideas and methods mostly clear, but grammar and/or spelling is poor, format does not follow guidelines, and /or there is redundancy between sections\
\
Does this manuscript require significant reduction in length? If 'Yes", please indicate where shortening is required in your specific comments: No\
\
Does the Data Accessibility section list all the datasets needed to recreate the results in the manuscript? If \'91No\'92, please specify which additional data are needed in your comments to the authors.: I didn't check}