{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1138\cocoasubrtf510
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf2 From: jen@molecol.com\
Subject: Decision for MEC-13-0777, Molecular Ecology\
Date: 28 August 2013 22:36:10 CEST\
To: jen@molecol.com\
\
28-Aug-2013\
\
Dear Reviewer,\
\
A decision of 'Reject, encourage to resubmit' has been rendered for 'Accounting for semi-permeability to gene flow using Approximate Bayesian Computation improves inference into the history of speciation: application to a mussel hybrid zone.', which you recently reviewed for Molecular Ecology. The comments of all reviewers and the decision letter are included at the bottom of this email.\
\
Your participation in the peer-review process is critical to the journal's success and directly impacts the quality of the research we publish. We appreciate your assistance with the evaluation of the manuscript and hope that we may contact you for assistance with future submissions falling within your areas of interest and expertise.\
\
All the best,\
\
Dr. Jennifer Gow\
Managing Editor, Molecular Ecology\
jen@molecol.com\
\
\
Decision letter in full:\
28-Aug-2013\
\
Dear Dr. Roux:\
\
Your manuscript entitled 'Accounting for semi-permeability to gene flow using Approximate Bayesian Computation improves inference into the history of speciation: application to a mussel hybrid zone.' has now been reviewed and assessed by an Editor. Their comments are included below. Unfortunately, this manuscript cannot be accepted at the present time. However, I encourage you to consider reworking your paper and resubmitting it at a later date.\
\
If you do choose to resubmit this manuscript in the future, please use our online submission system. After logging into your author portal, select 'Manuscripts with decisions', then create a resubmission of 'Accounting for semi-permeability to gene flow using Approximate Bayesian Computation improves inference into the history of speciation: application to a mussel hybrid zone.'. We have a standard resubmission deadline of one year, which can be extended within reason. Please do not upload your resubmission as a new manuscript.\
\
Please note that it is Molecular Ecology policy to allow only one reject/encourage decision per manuscript. Resubmitted papers must therefore be improved to the point of acceptability or they will be rejected outright.\
\
IMPORTANT: Your original files will be available to you when you upload your revised manuscript. Please delete any outdated files before completing the submission.\
\
Thank you for submitting your research to Molecular Ecology, and I hope that you will resubmit your manuscript in the near future.\
\
All the best,\
\
Dr. Jennifer Gow\
Managing Editor, Molecular Ecology\
6270 University Blvd\
Vancouver, BC\
V6T 1Z4\
Canada\
E-mail: jen@molecol.com\
\
Editor Comments to Author:\
\
This MS is interesting from two points of view: developing a method for estimating heterogeneity in gene flow across loci, and applying it to data on a mussel hybrid zone. \'a0The referees are supportive, but two of them are quite critical, making similar points, with which I largely agree. \'a0The MS does not meet the high threshold required \'a0for publication in Molecular Ecology, either for its novel methodology, or for its new insights into the mussel system. \'a0Previous detailed genetic analysis has already shown heterogeneity in introgression across the mussel hybrid zone, as the authors make clear in the introduction: these analyses are in many ways more illuminating than the "black box" ABC approach used here, and so the work would need to be justified by the development of new methods that can be widely used. \'a0This would indeed be valuable, but as the reviewers' comments make clear, is a difficult task that demands a much more detailed study based on simulated data. \'a0As it stands, this paper uses essentially the same methods as in the authors' recent MBE paper, and does not go beyond that in developing the methodology.\
\
An extensively revised MS, focussing on validating the methodology for use on other systems, would be very welcome, but would require a substantial amount of work. \'a0I do not agree with rev. 1 that selection needs to be simulated explicitly, since it is reasonably clear that local selection acts in the same way as a local reduction in gene flow, as assumed here. \'a0However, the other comments of reviewers 1 & 2 give very helpful suggestions for strengthening the work: in particular, showing that the estimated model does fit the data well, and using simulated data to show the accuracy of parameter estimates. \'a0It is also essential to show why the method apparently has high power to detect heterogeneity, even though the posterior probabilities of the alternative models are rather similar: this is a worrying mystery. \'a0It is also important to show how much heterogeneity in gene flow could be detected with a given size of dataset, so that others could have some idea of the likely power of the method. \'a0The inclusion of recombination in the analysis is a strength, but needs to be justified by examination of simulations with different recombination rates. \'a0Finally (and not least important) there needs to be a comparison with the alternative likelihood-based method of Sousa et al., which has the same aims.\
\
This would make for a much stronger paper, which would allow the method to be applied with confidence by others. \'a0It would be a lot of work, but that is in the nature of this (difficult) problem. \
\
Yours sincerely,\
\
Prof. Nick Barton\
Subject Editor, Molecular Ecology\
\
Reviewer Comments to Author:\
Reviewer: 1\
\
Recommendation: Reject, encourage resubmission\
\
Comments:\
See separate PDF attached.\
\
Additional Questions:\
Quality of Science: Mostly competent, but suffering from flaws of a technical or analytical nature\
\
Importance of Science: Research addresses a consequential question in ecology, evolution, behaviour, or conservation\
\
Quality of Presentation: Ideas and methods mostly clear, but grammar and/or spelling is poor, format does not follow guidelines, and /or there is redundancy between sections\
\
Does this manuscript require significant reduction in length? If 'Yes", please indicate where shortening is required in your specific comments: No\
\
Does the Data Accessibility section list all the datasets needed to recreate the results in the manuscript? If \'91No\'92, please specify which additional data are needed in your comments to the authors.: I didn't check\
\
\
\
\
Reviewer: 2\
\
Recommendation: Reject, encourage resubmission\
\
Comments:\
Roux et al. analyse sequence data (8 loci) from two sister taxa of mussels in an ABC framework to distinguish between a set of complex divergence with migration models. Their analysis suggests that migration is heterogeneous both in time (secondary contact following initial isolation) and across loci. Such analyses are obviously very relevant for understanding the build-up of reproductive isolation during speciation, and the finding that such complex models can potentially be distinguished from sequence data is exciting. However, given the assumptions and complexity of the model (9 parameters) and the small number of loci used, I am not quite convinced that the apparent difference in migration rate is the only (or best) explanation for the data. Effectively, Roux et al assume that loci are the same in all respects (mutation, recombination, effective N_e) apart from migration. Ignoring these other sources of heterogeneity between loci must inflate the inferred heterogeneity in migration rate. I think it is important to check whether the inference of heterogeneous migration is robust to heterogeneity in mutation rate. There are also some issues with the model selection and the use of PODS in this that should be addressed.\
\
1) Model selection: I am puzzled by the model selection results; The SC model has a posterior probability of 0.52, the IM model 0.40, i.e. difference in support between the two histories is very small (Bayes Factor = 1.35). Considering that the IM model has one less parameter, one could argue that it should be accepted as the most parsimonious scenario. I am also not sure about the stepwise procedure; first homogeneous and heterogeneous models within each historical scenario are compared, then historical scenarios are compared against each other assuming migration is heterogeneous. If one were to do the model selection the other way around, i.e. test for different historical scenarios first and then look at heterogeneity in migration rate, one would arrive at a different conclusion. Would it not be simpler to compare all models in a single step to avoid this? It would also be useful to calculate the BF for each model.\
\
2) Incorporating recombination: Recombination within loci is estimated using a likelihood method but it is not explained i) how this was done (Table S2 suggests that samples from each population were run separately, i.e. there are two different recombination rates for each locus) and ii) how the estimate recombination rates were used in the ABC inference (was the recombination rate fixed for each locus? If so, which of the two rates was used?). iii) It is unclear to me how meaningful these recombination rate estimates are given that LDhat assumes a single panmictic population of constant size (in contrast to the complex history Roux et al are trying to fit to the data). Why not include recombination in the ABC as another parameter with some prior distribution and estimate it from the data together with the historical parameters?\
\
3) Mutation model: Please explain in the Methods what mutation model was assumed in the ABC. The fact that only a single mutation rate is given (same in Roux 2013), suggests that mutational heterogeneity between loci was not incorporated in the analysis. This is a potential worry given that the analysis is based on a mixture of coding and putatively non-coding (how was this assessed?) loci. A reduced mutation rate at a locus would be erroneously interpreted as a high apparent migration rate. The fact that the coding locus (mc125) has a much higher migration rate estimate than average suggests that this may indeed be the case. I think that mutational heterogeneity should be incorporated in the ABC before attempting to fit complex models of migration. \
\
4) Given that the estimated migration rates are very similar, it would be useful to show that a model with two M parameters really fits better than a simpler model with symmetric migration? I can see how there may be some information to estimate a distribution of migration rates, but surely there is no information to estimate two migration rate parameters per locus (see Sousa et al 2011). I suggest to remove/shorten the relevant section in the Results. The table of migration rates and Fig. 7 could be moved to the Suppl.\
\
5) Pseudo observed datasets: As a check, the model selection procedure is applied to 1000 simulated datasets generated by randomly drawing from the prior. This shows that models can be distinguished over the wide prior range of parameter values but I think does not address the question of how much better the SC model fits the real data compared to the IM model. To investigate this, one would need to simulate additional PODS by drawing parameters from the estimated posterior (rather than prior) distributions of parameters under the SC and IM models and check how often the true model is recovered.\
\
Minor comments:\
- l.25 "improved", it is unclear relative to what the improvement is? \'a0\
- l.57 Maybe include a ref. to allele frequency spectrum methods too, i.e. Gutenkunst et al. (2010) \
- l.77 "supported by" is not needed.\
- l.113 Please say somewhere in the paragraph how many individuals were sampled/sequenced (this only appears in the Results).\
- l.148 See 2) above, more information on how recombination was estimated would be useful. \
-l. 164 Forward in time.\
- l. 183 "0-25 generations" I assume you mean 0-25 in units of 2 N_e generations?\
- I assume CM in fig 3 and fig S1 means "continuous migration". It would help to use either IM or CM consistently throughout.\
- l. 248 and caption Fig 2. use standard terminology here, i.e. "distribution of pair wise nucleotide differences" or "mismatch distribution". I am not sure how relevant the test of unimodality is; after all we don't expect mismatch distributions to always be unimodal even in a single population given the randomness of the coalescent.\
- l 278. I don't understand how relevant the PODS results (which are based on random draws from the prior distribution) are for interpreting the posterior probabilities estimated from the real data. Surely the probability of the inferred SC model being correct would be much lower if one conditioned PODS on the posterior of parameters under the 2nd best model (See 5) above).\
- l. 301 It would be useful to give the highest posterior density intervals for the times here. It also may be worth mentioning that the HPD for the split and contact times overlap.\
- l. 313 Given that the posterior distribution of locus-specific migration rates are very wide and not informative for most loci, Fig.7 could be relegated to the Suppl. information.\
- l. 372 repetition of approach.\
- l. 377 Why is the distribution of apparent migration rates dependent on the time of \'a0the split and secondary contact. Doesn't it just depend on the strength of LD and selection against incompatible genes (which in turn does depend on the demographic history). \'a0\'a0\
- l. 383 I don't understand why the L-shape is consistent with a long divergence time.\
- l. 397-400 Slower than what? I don't understand the reasoning in this sentence.\
- l. 423 Ambiguous in what sense? Why is the failure to distinguish between IM and SC ambiguous, maybe there is just limited power?\
- l. 424 Quantify large variance. Don't we expect a large variance of these parameter estimates given the randomness of the coalescent and the small number of loci?\
\
\
Additional Questions:\
Quality of Science: Weak, major flaws or inconsistencies\
\
Importance of Science: Research addresses a consequential question in ecology, evolution, behaviour, or conservation\
\
Quality of Presentation: Writing is clear, methods and data analyses are transparent, ideas make sense, proper grammar and spelling is employed, redundancy is avoided\
\
Does this manuscript require significant reduction in length? If 'Yes", please indicate where shortening is required in your specific comments: No\
\
Does the Data Accessibility section list all the datasets needed to recreate the results in the manuscript? If \'91No\'92, please specify which additional data are needed in your comments to the authors.: I didn't check\
\
\
\
\
Reviewer: 3\
\
Recommendation: Accept, minor revisions\
\
Comments:\
This MS describes an application of hierarchical Bayesian analysis to the estimation of population history and gene flow from genetic data. The main points of general interest are that there is strong support for heterogeneous migration rates across loci and that allowing for this heterogeneity markedly improves the ability to distinguish among alternative historical scenarios. Neither point is entirely new (as the authors clearly acknowledge) but, nevertheless, I think the methods and results presented here will be of widespread interest. The work itself and the preparation of the paper have been done to a very high standard. I have a few comments, below, but none is very serious (with the possible exception of the point about mutation-rate heterogeneity).\
\
25 \'96 \'91improved\'92 \'96need to say relative to what alternative\
67 \'96 I think the method of Bazin et al. 2010 should also be mentioned here\
113 \'96in the context of this study, \'91known to represent pure patches\'92 probably needs some more explanation. Presumably, these populations are genetically typical of populations remote from current contact zones.\
188-190 \'96 and what about the multiplier, c?\
207 \'96 Sobs and Ssim have not been defined. Presumably they are the vectors of summary statistics? It should probably be stated explicitly that all of the descriptive statistics mentioned earlier we used in the ABC.\
Figure 2 \'96 I think the title is a bit misleading \'96 this shows the distribution of pairwise distances between alleles for each locus (not \'91among loci\'92)\
246-252 \'96 These two sentences appear somewhat contradictory. The first says that all loci depart from unimodality while the second suggests that only a proportion are bimodal. Some might be considered trimodal, I suppose, and this might be expected if there is intragenic recombination. However, I think the main difference is that the modes are more widely separated in some cases than others. This actually raises an interesting issue. Suppose a model of heterogeneous mutation rates among loci were tested instead of a model of heterogeneous migration rate: would it also improve the fit? Heterogeneous neutral mutation rate could be due to background selection, for example.\
Figure S1 \'96 How is the black line obtained from the 1000 pseudo-observed data sets?\
278-282 \'96 I am afraid this analysis (and Figure S2) needs more explanation before it becomes accessible to me.\
Figure 7 \'96It seems odd that these genomic distributions do not extend as high as the highest medians for the small number of sampled loci (Table 4). Why is this? It is reflected in the comment on line 310. (There is generally some repetition of information between figures and tables so it may be possible to move one or the other to SI in some cases.)\
331 \'96 Maybe the distinctions between models would be less apparent with more loci because a larger sample of loci would reflect the average diversity and divergence more reliably (or perhaps because it would allow \'91outlier\'92 loci to be excluded?). Perhaps the miss-estimation in the homogeneous models is due to the small sample of loci? This might be an alternative perspective worth considering.\
\
\
\
Additional Questions:\
Quality of Science: Experimentally and/or theoretically excellent reliable data, no fatal flaws\
\
Importance of Science: Research addresses a consequential question in ecology, evolution, behaviour, or conservation\
\
Quality of Presentation: Writing is clear, methods and data analyses are transparent, ideas make sense, proper grammar and spelling is employed, redundancy is avoided\
\
Does this manuscript require significant reduction in length? If 'Yes", please indicate where shortening is required in your specific comments: No\
\
Does the Data Accessibility section list all the datasets needed to recreate the results in the manuscript? If \'91No\'92, please specify which additional data are needed in your comments to the authors.: I didn't check}