{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2636
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0\cname textColor;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf2 From: "Theoretical Population Biology" <em@editorialmanager.com>\
Subject: Thank you for reviewing for Theoretical Population Biology\
Date: 10 May 2022 at 06:41:04 CEST\
To: "Simon Aeschbacher" <simon.aeschbacher@ieu.uzh.ch>\
Reply-To: Theoretical Population Biology <support@elsevier.com>\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec3 Manuscript Number: TPB-D-22-00016 \uc0\u8239  \
\
Joint effect of changing selection and demography on the site frequency spectrum \uc0\u8239  \
\
Kavita Jain; Sachin Kaushik \
\
Dear \'a0Aeschbacher, \uc0\u8239  \u8239  \
\
Thank you for reviewing the above referenced manuscript. I greatly appreciate your contribution and time, which not only assisted me in reaching my decision, but also enables the author(s) to disseminate their work at the highest possible quality. Without the dedication of reviewers like you, it would be impossible to manage an efficient peer review process and maintain the high standards necessary for a successful journal. \uc0\u8239  \u8239  \
\
I hope that you will consider Theoretical Population Biology as a potential journal for your own submissions in the future. \uc0\u8239  \u8239  \
\
As a token of appreciation, we would like to provide you with a review recognition certificate on Elsevier Reviewer Hub (reviewerhub.elsevier.com). Through the Elsevier Reviewer Hub, you can also keep track of all your reviewing activities for this and other Elsevier journals on Editorial Manager.\
\
If you have not yet activated your 30 day complimentary access to ScienceDirect and Scopus, you can still do so via the [Rewards] section of your profile in Reviewer Hub (reviewerhub.elsevier.com).\
You can always claim your 30-day access period later, however, please be aware that the access link will expire six months after you have accepted to review.\
\
\
Kind regards, \uc0\u8239  \u8239  \
\
John Wakeley \uc0\u8239  \
Associate Editor \uc0\u8239  \
Theoretical Population Biology \uc0\u8239  \u8239  \
\
More information and support\uc0\u8239  \
\
You will find guidance and support on reviewing, as well as information including details of how Elsevier recognizes reviewers, on Elsevier\'92s Reviewer Hub: https://www.elsevier.com/reviewers \
\
FAQ: How can I reset a forgotten password? \
https://service.elsevier.com/app/answers/detail/a_id/28452/supporthub/publishing/ \
For further assistance, please visit our customer service site: https://service.elsevier.com/app/home/supporthub/publishing/\
Here you can search for solutions on a range of topics, find answers to frequently asked questions, and learn more about Editorial Manager via interactive tutorials. You can also talk 24/7 to our customer support team by phone and 24/7 by live chat and email\
\
#REV_TPB#\
\
To ensure this email reaches the intended recipient, please do not delete the above code\
\
__________________________________________________\
In compliance with data protection regulations, you may request that we remove your personal registration details at any time. \'a0(Use the following URL: https://www.editorialmanager.com/tpb/login.asp?a=r). Please contact the publication office if you have any questions.}