# Monthly Journal Review September 2020

Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- eLife
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
- Example: Easteal et al. (2020) Equitable Expanded Carrier Screening Needs Indigenous Clinical and Population Genomic Data. Am J Hum Genet 107(2):175–182 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.06.005 **carrier screening, personalised medicine, expanded carrier screening, recessive monogenetic diseases, population history, population structure**

## eLife
- Example: Doulcier et al. (2020) Eco-evolutionary dynamics of nested Darwinian populations and the emergence of community-level heredity. eLife 2020;9:e53433 https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.53433 **artificial community selection, Darwinian properties, ecology, evolutionary biology, experimental evolution, major evolutionary transitions, multi-level selection**

## Genetics
- Example: Amster and Sella (2020) Life History Effects on Neutral Diversity Levels of Autosomes and Sex Chromosomes. Genetics 215(4):1133–1142 https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.120.303119 **autosomes, polymorphism, sex chromosomes, neutral diversity, life-history effects**

## PLoS Biol
Nothing this month

## PNAS
- Storz et al. (2020) Discovery of the world’s highest-dwelling mammal. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117(31):18169–18171 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2005265117 **Andes, Phyllotis, high altitude, hypoxia, range limits**
- Bard et al. (2020) Extended dilation of the radiocarbon time scale between 40,000 and 48,000 y BP and the overlap between Neanderthals and *Homo sapiens*. PNAS 117(35)21005-21007 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2012307117 **radiocarbon dating, atmospheric C14 concentration, Neanderthals, modern humans, time dilation, palaeontology**


## Theor Popul Biol
Nothing this month


## Picks summary

## Picks by others
