# Monthly Journal Review

Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- eLife
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
- Chengzhen et al. (2020) Population Histories of the United States Revealed through Fine-Scale Migration and Haplotype Analysis. Am J Hum Genet 106(3):371–388 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.02.002

## eLife
- Brook et al. (2020) Accelerated viral dynamics in bat cell lines, with implications for zoonotic emergence. eLife 2020(9):e48401 https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.48401 **SARS coronavirus**
- Mostafavi et al. (2020) Variable prediction accuracy of polygenic scores within an ancestry group. eLife 2020(9):e48376 https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.48376
- Morris et al. (2020) Can education be personalised using pupils’ genetic data? eLife 2020(9):e49962 https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.49962. See also perspective by Janssens (https://doi.org//10.7554/eLife.55720). **nature vs. nurture (genes vs. environment), education**

## Genetics
- Nothing

## PLoS Biol
- Nothing

## PNAS
- Kroeger et al. (2020) Older mothers produce more successful daughters. PNAS 117(9):4809-4814 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1908551117 **Pick**
- Douhard et al. (2020) Sons accelerate maternal aging in a wild mammal. PNAS 117(9):4850-4857 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1914654117. See also commentary by Froy & Gamelon (https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2001659117) **Pick**
- Slodkowicz & Goldman (2020) Integrated structural and evolutionary analysis reveals common mechanisms underlying adaptive evolution in mammals. PNAS 117(11):5977–5986 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1916786117
- Wang et al. (2020) Sympatric speciation of wild emmer wheat driven by ecology and chromosomal rearrangements. PNAS 117(11):5955–5963 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1920415117 **Pick**
- Matthews et al. (2020) Killer whale presence drives bowhead whale selection for sea ice in Arctic seascapes of fear. PNAS 117(12):6590–6598 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1911761117
- Barrett et al. (2020) Social dimensions of fertility behavior and consumption patterns in the Anthropocene. PNAS 117(12)6300–6307 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1909857117
- Herz et al. (2020) Opinion: Authors overestimate their contribution to scientific work, demonstrating a strong bias. PNAS 117(12) 6282--6285 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2003500117

## Theor Popul Biol
- Nothing

## Other's picks
- Christine:
    - Invasion in spite of low diversity in sea grass (conservation genetics).
    - Fitness consequences of genetic rescue 
- Fred:
    - Open access book on statistical population genomics (Kelleher and Lohse)
    - Evolution: inbreeding depression in *Mimulus guttatus* based on deleterious allele model (not dominance).

## Notes to Wang et al. (2020)

Ecological divergence in plants is a strong candidate mechanism driving speciation, but demonstration that it indeed drives speciation in sympatry is still scarce.

The authors study tetraploid wild emmer wheat (*Triticum dicoccoides* Koern) at the "Evolution Canyon" microsite at Mt. Karmel (Israel), a hotspot of sympatric speciation. They show how disruptive ecological selection (drought, humidity, pathogens) drives primary sympatric speciation in situ. Wild emmer wheat is the progenitor of bread wheat. The authors suggest that divergent selection split an ancestral population into three reproductively isolated populations. Each of these populations evolved unique adaptive strategies, including fungal disease resistance, irradiance tolerance, and divergent flowering time.

The authors review what evidence is needed to substantiate en example of sympatric speciation:
1. Species occur in the same geographic location (could be debated);
2. Species are reproductively isolated (in combination with 1., this would here mean that RI must be other than merely geographic);
3. Species must be evolutionary sister taxa.

Further, supporting, evidence may come from showing that earlier periods of allopatry are unlikely.

The authors review two major classes of questions about sympatric speciation:
1. How did RI arise in sympatry?
2. What is the nature of the selection pressures and genetic drift that drove speciation?

Another question the authors do not mention is: What is the genetic basis of RI?

The study analysed data from a long-term research project established in 1990 at the so-called "Evolution Canyon" microsites on Mt. Karmel in Isreal. At each of the four microsites, there are strong and sharp ecological contrasts across short geographic distances (< 1 km). The study focusses on one microsite called EC-I, which comprises twin slopes with extremely sharp ecological contrasts in terms of solar radiation, humidity, and temperature (< 250 m apart).

The authors combine genomics, cytogenetics, analyses of hybrid sterility patterns, and observation of divergent ecologically important traits.
- 47 accessions
- Identified "useful" SNPs on 55K Affymetrix Wheat GeneChip by BLASTing flanking sequences to emmer reference genome
- NJ tree based on 30.6k SNPs: Three monophyletic clusters corresponding to three EC-I populations. No evidence of recent admixture and historical gene flow (ABBA-BABA).
- Admixture and fastSTRUCTURE: evidence for sequence of splits
- Whole-genome resequencing of 35 accessions (9.5 to 18.5x coverage). After BQSR and VQSR recalibration, some 46 Mio. high-quality SNPs were identified and used.
- PSMC: branching around 3000 to 6000 years ago after a shared bottleneck. Speculation: bottleneck (genetic drift) could have had strong influence on initial divergence. Recovery of Ne thereafter (for each of the three subpopulations).

This study provides a model for adaptive ecological sympatric speciation in plants under biotic and abiotic stressors.