# Monthly Journal Review

Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- eLife
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
Nothing

## eLife
- Dopheide et al. (2020) Rarity is a more reliable indicator of land-use impacts on soil invertebrate communities than other diversity metrics. eLife 2020;9:e52787 https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.52787 **land use impact**, **soil invertebrate**, **New Zealand**, **DNA metabarcoding**, **biodiversity metrics**, **phylogenetic rarity**
- Das et al. (2020) Predictable properties of fitness landscapes induced by adaptational tradeoffs. eLife 2020;9:e55155 https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55155 **mutational fitness effects**, **adaptational trade-off**, **antibiotic resistance**, **mathematical model**, **rugged fitness landscape**
- Reed et al. (2020) Paranoia as a deficit in non-social belief updating. eLife 2020;9:e56345 https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.56345 **paranoia**, **harm**, **belief**, **social threat**, **methamphetamine**, **humans**, **rats**, **volatile environment**
- Rivett et al. (2020) Screening of healthcare workers for SARS-CoV-2 highlights the role of asymptomatic carriage in COVID-19 transmission. eLife 2020;9:e58728 https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.58728 **SARS-CoV-2**, **COVID-19**, **healthcare workers**, **asymptomatic carriers**

## Genetics
- Johri et al. (2020) Toward an Evolutionarily Appropriate Null Model: Jointly Inferring Demography and Purifying Selection. Genetics 215(1) 173–192 https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.119.303002 **Pick**, **background selection**, **demographic inference**, **distribution of fitness effects**, **approximate Bayesian computation**
- Sommer (2020) Phenotypic Plasticity: From Theory and Genetics to Current and Future Challenges. Genetics 215(1):1–13 https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.120.303163 **review**, **phenotypic plasticity**, **polyphenism**, **switch genes**, **canalisation**, **genetic assimilation**, **genetic accommodation**
- Harris & DeGiorgio (2020) Identifying and Classifying Shared Selective Sweeps from Multilocus Data. Genetics 215(1):143–171 https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.120.303137 **Pick**, **expected haplotype homozygosity**, **multilocus genotype**, **ancestral sweep**, **convergent sweep**

## PLoS Biol
Nothing

## PNAS
- Lynch (2020) The evolutionary scaling of cellular traits imposed by the drift barrier. PNAS 117(19):10435–10444 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2000446117 **Pick**, **cellular evolution**, **mutation bias**, **genetic drift**, **effective population size**, **organism size**
- de Manuel et al. (2020) The evolutionary history of extinct and living lions. PNAS 117(20):10927–10934 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1919423117
- Burmeister et al. (2020) Pleiotropy complicates a trade-off between phage resistance and antibiotic resistance. PNAS 117(21):11207–11216 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1919888117 **pleiotropy**, **trade-off**, **pathogen resistance**
- Schoch et al. (2020) A Triassic stem-salamander from Kyrgyzstan and the origin of salamanders. PNAS 117(21):11584–11588 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2001424117 **amphibians**, **origin of salamanders**, **amphibian fossils**, **Mesozoic era**
- Mehlhoff et al. (2020) Collateral fitness effects of mutations. PNAS 117(21):11597–11607 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1918680117 **fitness landscape**, **protein evolution**, **stress response**, **deleterious mutations**

## Theor Popul Biol
Nothing


## Picks summary

### Johri et al. (2020) Genetics

Title: Toward an Evolutionarily Appropriate Null Model: Jointly Inferring Demography and Purifying Selection

- Relative evolutionary role of adaptive and nonadaptive processes as a central debate in population genetics.
- Advances made in theory of underlying models and statistical methods for estimating parameters of adaptive and nonadaptive processes.
- Missing: appropriate null model(s) are missing.
- Here: Promote as a null model one that incorporates genetic drift (as modulated by the demographic history) and purifying selection as the two "constantly operating" processes. Idea: Use this null model to assess role of adaptive processes.
- Scope: Assess how population size changes and strength of purifying selection affect patterns of variation at neutral sites near functional genomic components.
- Novel statistical framework for jointly inferring contributions from selective and demographic forces.
- Application to a Zambian population of *Drosophila melanogaster* (re-analysis of data): find a much slower rate of population growth than was inferred when purifying selection was ignored.
- Approach:
    1. Investigate joint effects of demography, DFE, and number of sites under selection on linked neutral variation.
    2. Utilise decay of BGS effect away from targets of selection (across regions spanning coding/nonnoncoding boundaries) to jointly infer the DFE of the coding region and the demographic history of the population by means of Approximate Bayesian Computation (ABC)
- Classification of regions:
    - Based on $\pi$ as a function of distance to functional region: $\pi = a + b\ln(x)$, where $a$ and $b$ are the intercept and slope and used to define the number of bases required for a 50, 75, and 90% recovery of $\pi$
    - Functional regions (experiencing selection)
    - Linked neutral (experiencing observable BGS)
    - Neutral (experiencing low/no observable BGS
- Summary statistics:
    - Nucleotide diversity $\pi$
    - Watterson's $\theta$
    - Tajima's $D$
    - Fay and Wu's $H$
    - Nr of singletons
    - Haplotype diversity
    - LD ($r^2$, $D$, $D^{\prime}$)
    - Divergence


## Others' picks

Mathieu:
- Bioinformatics 1:
    - Method for speeding up coalescence simulations
- Conservation Genetics
    - mtDNA and STR data to study decrease in genetic diversity in lynx population. Focus on reintroduced admixed founder population.
- PLoS Genetics
    - Rousselle et al.: Adaptation and time-scale limitation 

Christine:
- Raises the question (again) if we still agree whether we do not want to have a list of keywords for what to search for? Suggestion: Compile a list of keywords as a help for people who screen journals.
    - Everyone should add their keywords to the slack channel
- Start (2020) Evolution: Soft and hard selection in the wild (gall makers). Relative importance of soft and hard selection.
- Van Buskirk and Jansen van Rensburg (2020) Evolution: Isolation by distance in Rana temporaria

Glauco:
- Tschirren et al. (2020): Boreliosis
- Mizer et al. (2020) Mol Ecol: Admixture among wild and related domestic species in feral swine population (US). High proportion of wild boar and beyond hybrid vigor.

Lukas:
- Halldorsson et al. (2020) Human Genetics. In humans, there is a mutagenic effect of recombination, and: recombination is under genetic control. 28,000 WG sequences from Iceland. Approach used is interesting: Graph Typer aligning whole genomes -> higher success in aligning complex areas of genomes.

Fred:
See Slack channel directly.