# Monthly Journal Review

Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- eLife
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
- None

## eLife
- Hsu et al. (2020) Rapid sex-specific adaptation to high temperature in *Drosophila*. eLife 9:e53237 https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.53237
- Crona (2020) Rank orders and signed interactions in evolutionary biology. eLife 9:e51004 https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.51004
- Bhardwaj et al. (2020) Origin of the mechanism of phenotypic plasticity in satyrid butterfly eyespots.  eLife 9:e49544 https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.49544
- Singh & Wurtele (2020) Genetic Novelty: How new genes are born. eLife 9:e55136 https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.55136

## Genetics
- Mirrahimi & Gandon (2020) Evolution of Specialization in Heterogeneous Environments: Equilibrium Between Selection, Mutation and Migration. *Genetics* 214(2):479–491 https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.119.302868 **Pick**
- Solis–Lemus et al. (2020) Leveraging Family History in Case-Control Analyses of Rare Variation. *Genetics* 214(2):295–303 https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.119.302846 **Pick**
- Osmond et al. (2020) Genetic Paths to Evolutionary Rescue and the Distribution of Fitness Effects Along Them. Genetics 214(2):493–510 https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.119.302890 **Pick**

## PLoS Biol
- Moest et al. (2020) Selective sweeps on novel and introgressed variation shape mimicry loci in a butterfly adaptive radiation. PLoS Biol 18(2):e3000597 https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3000597

## PNAS
- Kessler et al. (2020) De novo mutations across 1,465 diverse genomes reveal mutational insights and reductions in the Amish founder population. *Proc Natl Acad Sci USA* 117(5):2560–2569 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1902766117 **Pick** (correlation between mutation rate and recombination rate)
- McDermott (2020) Science and Culture: Dinosaur art evolves with new discoveries in paleontology. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 117(6):2728–2731 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2000784117 **Science and Culture**, **Dinosaurs**
- Ying-Chen et al. (2020) Precision medicine integrating whole-genome sequencing, comprehensive metabolomics, and advanced imaging. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 117(6):3053–3062 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1909378117
- Miller et al. (2020) Evolutionary dynamics of recent selection on cognitive abilities. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 117(6):3045–3052 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1918592117
- Kolobova et al. (2020) Archaeological evidence for two separate dispersals of Neanderthals into southern Siberia. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 117(6):2879–2885 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1918047117
- Smith et al. (2020) Global gene flow releases invasive plants from environmental constraints on genetic diversity. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 117(8):4218–4227 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1915848117
- Román-Palacios & Wiens (2020) Recent responses to climate change reveal the drivers of species extinction and survival. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 117(8):4211–4217 10.1073/pnas.1913007117 **Pick** (Importance of dispersal vs ecological niche shifts as response to climate change)

## Theor Popul Biol
- None


## Summary of Osmond et al. (2020)

Title: Genetic paths to evolutionary rescue and the distribution of fitness effects along them

Evolutionary rescue is the process by which a declining population rapidly adapts to the conditions that cause the decline and, eventually, escapes extinction. Evolutionary rescue is of interest for instance in the context of conservation of fragmented populations, but also the evolution of resistance. Studies of evolutionary rescue have gained momentum over the past decades, as interest in eco-evolutionary dynamics and rapid evolution have increased. Genome-scale sequencing allows tracking evolutionary change at vast numbers of sites, and, coupled with experimental evolution in fast-evolving microbes has produced novel empirical insight. 

The three main line of interest concern the probability of rescue, the rate of adaptation, the evolutionary paths taken over the course of adaptation, and the genetic basis of rapid adaptation. A principal observation in asexual microbes is that the stronger selection and the more novel the environment, the more likely it is that adaptation involves fewer mutations of larger effect. Some datasets even suggest a single large-effect mutation. Overall, experimental data suggest a hump-shaped distribution of fitness effects as predicted by earlier theory (Kimura 1983), but with a lower bound significantly higher than zero. Such experiments, however, usually do not involve population decline, as would be important for the study of the evolution of resistance. 

As the authors claim, there is little theory to predict how evolutionary rescue by rapid adaptation is realised. The existing theory is based on two models footed on two extreme genetic bases: minute changes in allele frequency across many loci in sexually reproducing organisms (the infinitesimal model) or the substitution of a single large-effect "resistance" mutation (the one-locus two-alleles model). Theory on evolutionary rescue involving an intermediate number of mutations is largely lacking. Hence, our understanding of the number of mutations at play and the distribution of their fitness effects remains limited. One line of theory suggests that rescue occurs by the fewest possible mutations of sufficiently large effect and that simultaneous mutations show synergistic effects. Another line of theory footed on different assumptions and studying a two-locus two-allele model found that rescue by sequential mutations is more likely under severe conditions. Here, the authors aim for a unifying theoretical framework.

The authors use Fisher's geometric model (FGM) of adaptation to study the genetic basis of evolutionary rescue. They focus on asexual populations that adapt through de novo mutations. The authors assume an instantaneous environmental change that initiates population decline. Moreover, and in contrast to previous work on Fisher's geometric model, the authors consider absolute (instead of relative) genotype fitness, and assume that multiple mutations can segregate simultaneously (stochastic tunnelling). The motivation for these modification is to allow for feedback between demography and evolution.

The authors explore how many mutational steps rescue takes, and what the expected distributions of fitness effects of the surviving genotypes and their mutations are.

Notes on assumptions and the approach:
- Each genotype characterised by a point in *n*-dimensional phenotypic space
- No environmental effects, i.e. the phenotype is the breeding value (the additive genetic effects to the offspring)
- Fitness is modelled by a multivariate Gaussian function and scales with the Euclidean distance of the phenotype from the optimum
- The continuous-time growth rate is taken to be natural logarithm of the absolute fitness
- No density- and frequency-dependence
- Fitness effect (selection coefficient) is the natural logarithm of the ratio of growth rates of a focal to a reference phenotype
- Isotropic version of FGM, i.e. mutations are uncorrelated across scaled traits
- Universal pleiotropy, i.e. each mutation affects all scaled phenotypes
- Continuum-of-alleles model, i.e. phenotype is continuous and each mutation is unique
- Mutations are additive, i.e. there is epistasis in fitness (and dominance under diploid selection), as fitness is a non-linear function of phenotype
- Assuming no recombination (i.e. asexual reproduction)
- Use an exact expression for the distribution of fitness effects (by Martin and Lenormand 2015)
- Lifecycle: Abrupt environmental change. Poisson number of offspring with mean equal to the exponential of the Malthusian fitness (maximum exponential growth rate). Discrete populations. No interactions between individuals, i.e. a branching process with density- and frequency-independent growth and fitness and no clonal interference. Each offspring mutates with probability U.
- Individual-based simulations to compare with numeric and analytical results. Populations considered rescued if there are at least 100 individuals with positive growth rate. Most common genotype at the time of rescue considered the "rescue genotype", and the number of mutational step was set to the number of mutations in that genotype.

- Theory: diffusion approximation of the probability of rescue by one versus multiple (two?) mutations.

Osmond et al. find that there are two dominant regimes for the dominant (i.e. typical) path to rescue: one that brings a population close to a new optimum through a single mutation, and one that does so via multiple mutations. Which of these paths is taken depends on the mutation rate and the magnitude of the environmental change. Higher mutation rates and larger environmental changes favour the multi-step pathway. In this multi-step scenario, intermediate genotypes serve as "springboards" to genotypes that facilitate rescue, but go extinct themselves. Compared to adaptation in a scenario without rescue, the genetic basis of evolutionary rescue studied by the authors is composed of fewer loci of larger effect.

