{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1561\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue0;\red9\green80\blue208;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\csgray\c0;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c0\c41176\c85098;
}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf2 From: ecoevo@nature.com\
Subject: Nature Ecology & Evolution: Receipt of review for NATECOLEVOL-18074839\
Date: 27 August 2018 at 14:24:02 CEST\
To: simon.aeschbacher@ieu.uzh.ch\
Reply-To: ecoevo@nature.com\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec3 27th August 2018\
\
Dear Dr. Aeschbacher\
\
This email is to acknowledge receipt of your review for the manuscript by Scott Taylor and co-authors, entitled "Insights from genomes into the evolutionary importance and prevalence of hybridization in nature". Thank you for your help in this matter.\
\
A copy of your review is attached below for your reference.\
\
As an appreciation for the time and expertise you offer to the peer-review process, Nature Research provides a summary of your refereeing activity for Nature journals. We hope you can use this record to demonstrate your contribution to the peer-review process and to the scientific community. \
\
To view a comprehensive and accurate record of your refereeing activity, you must take a few easy steps and link your multiple journal accounts.\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://mts-natecolevol.nature.com/cgi-bin/main.plex?form_type=home"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 Click here}} to be directed to your login page.\
\
In addition, Springer Nature encourages all authors and reviewers to associate an Open Researcher and Contributor Identifier (ORCID) to their account. ORCID is a community-based initiative that provides an open, non-proprietary and transparent registry of unique identifiers to help disambiguate research contributions. \
\
Yours sincerely\
\
Editorial Assistant\
Nature Ecology & Evolution\
The Macmillan Building\
4 Crinan Street\
London, N1 9XW\
UK\
\
\
**************\
\
Your comments:\
\
Comment to Author:\
# Summary\
\
Taylor and Larson present a concise and well-written review on recent developments in the study of hybridisation in the era of genomics. The authors focus on the prevalence of ancient hybridisation, the challenges of demonstrating an adaptive nature of introgression, and the on-going debate about the importance of hybridisation as a direct mechanism of speciation. These are long-standing questions in evolutionary biology that are now becoming more accessible with the availability of high-resolution genome sequences from a growing range of taxa. The review is therefore timely. The authors nicely place these questions into the historical context, summarise recent achievements, and discuss the challenges that remain to be addressed. Overall, I have no doubt that this review will be informative and relevant to a broad readership. I only had a few comments that might help towards diversifying the cited research and that might lead to a slightly more positive view on what we can expect to learn from population-genomic approaches without direct measures of fitness.\
\
# Comments\
\
**1.** In l. 149\'96151 you may want to refer to Harris et al. 2016 (doi: 10.1534/genetics.116.186890) and Juri\'e7 et al. 2016 (doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006340) for studies that explicitly demonstrate and quantify the extent and strength of purifying selection against Neanderthal-derived introgressed variants. The same references may seem relevant in the context of line 164.\
\
**2.** In the context of conservation (lines 202\'96210) and/or hybridisation between wild and domesticated organisms (lines 257\'96258), an example worth mentioning is the introgression from domestic goat of variation at the MHC into the wild relative Alpine ibex studied by Grossen et al. 2014 (10.1371/journal.pgen.1004438). The authors report sweep-like signatures surrounding the focal MHC region in Alpine ibex and conclude that introgression is likely adaptive. However, direct evidence in terms of fitness measures is lacking. \
\
**3.** I very much appreciate the authors' cautious plea for direct evidence in terms of fitness estimates and/or a demonstrated adaptive function of the questionable gene(s) before adaptive introgression is inferred (lines 268\'96274). However, introgression may over time have lost its measurable adaptive nature, as the introgressed haplotypes have reached very high frequency or because the environment has changed (again). Such historically adaptive introgression may be very challenging to demonstrate other than by indirect population-genomic methods. In addition, showing direct evidence for adaptive introgression may remain logistically or legally impossible for a number of organisms. In summary, I would therefore vote for a slightly less pessimistic view of indirect population-genomic inference as a means of demonstrating evidence for adaptive introgression. There is still quite some activity on-going in the field towards improving the specificity and resolution of such indirect inference methods, and it would seem too early for a conclusive judgement of this approach. \
\
\
# Minor comments\
\
l. 18: "The extent that hybridization" -> "The extent to which hybridisation"\
l. 74: Add a period after "Meier et al. 2017)"\
l. 245: "except in non-model organisms" -> "except in model organisms" (?)\
Table 1: 1st column: "invasive sculpin" -> "Invasive sculpin"\
\
Comment to Editors:\
I suggest this review be accepted with a few minor revisions.\
\
\
\
\
This email has been sent through the Springer Nature Tracking System NY-610A-NPG&MTS\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0

\i \cf3 Confidentiality Statement:\
\
This e-mail is confidential and subject to copyright. Any unauthorised use or disclosure of its contents is prohibited. If you have received this email in error please notify our Manuscript Tracking Tracking System Helpdesk team at {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://platformsupport.nature.com/"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 http://platformsupport.nature.com}} .\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf3 Details of the confidentiality and pre-publicity policy may be found here {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.nature.com/authors/policies/confidentiality.html"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 http://www.nature.com/authors/policies/confidentiality.html}} 
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.nature.com/info/privacy.html"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 Privacy Policy}} | {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://mts-natecolevol.nature.com/"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 Update Profile}} \
}