# Monthly Journal Review January 2021

Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
- Stern et al. (2021) Disentangling selection on genetically correlated polygenic traits via whole-genome genealogies. Am J Hum Genet [early online], https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.12.0059 **polygenic adaptation, DNA sequence variation, GWAS summary statistics, transient directional selection, polygenic traits, pleiotropy, likelihood method** PICK
- Lee et al. (2021) PLEIO: a method to map and interpret pleiotropic loci with GWAS summary statistics. Am J Hum Genet 108(1):36–48, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.11.017 **pleiotropy, multi-trait mapping, association mapping, GWAS, genetic correlation, heritability, variance component**
- Kerin & Marchini (2021) Leveraging phenotypic variability to identify genetic interactions in human phenotypes. Am J Hum Genet 108(1):49–67, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.11.016 **GWAS, vQTL, phenotypic variance, gene-environment interactions, GxE, complex traits, body mass index, diabetes**
- Qiao et al. (2021) Distinguishing pedigree relationships via multi-way identity by descent sharing and sex-specific genetic maps. Am J Hum Genet 108(1):68–83 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.12.004 **identity by descent, pedigree reconstruction, sex-specific genetic maps, genetic relatedness**


## Genetics
- Variation in Genetic Relatedness Is Determined by the Aggregate Recombination Process. Carl Veller,  Nathaniel B. Edelman,  Pavitra Muralidhar and  Martin A. Nowak. GENETICS December 1, 2020 vol. 216 no. 4 985-994; https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.120.303680 **meiosis, recombination, identity by descent, relatedness, heritability, genetic mapping, crossover interference** PICK
- Detecting Selection from Linked Sites Using an F-Model. Marco Galimberti,  Christoph Leuenberger,  Beat Wolf,  Sándor Miklós Szilágyi,  Matthieu Foll and  Daniel Wegmann. GENETICS December 1, 2020 vol. 216 no. 4 1205-1215; https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.120.303780 **Bayesian statistics, F-statistics, Hidden Markov Model, divergent selection, balancing selection**
- How Good Are Predictions of the Effects of Selective Sweeps on Levels of Neutral Diversity? Brian Charlesworth. GENETICS December 1, 2020 vol. 216 no. 4 1217-1238; https://doi.org/10.1534/genetics.120.303734 **selective sweeps, background selection, neutral variability, favourable mutations, Drosophila melanogaster**


## PLoS Biol
Nothing this month

## PNAS
- Ancient DNA from Guam and the peopling of the Pacific. Irina Pugach,  Alexander Hübner,  Hsiao-chun Hung, Matthias Meyer,  Mike T. Carson, and Mark Stoneking. PNAS January 5, 2021 118 (1) e2022112118; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2022112118 **ancient DNA, Micronesia, Polynesia, human settlement, Mariana Islands, Western Pacific, Philippines**
- Maternal death and offspring fitness in multiple wild primates. Matthew N. Zipple, Jeanne Altmann,  Fernando A. Campos,  Marina Cords,  Linda M. Fedigan, Richard R. Lawler,  Elizabeth V. Lonsdorf,  Susan Perry,  Anne E. Pusey, Tara S. Stoinski,  Karen B. Strier, and  Susan C. Alberts. PNAS January 5, 2021 118 (1) e2015317118; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2015317118 **maternal death, maternal effects, intergenerational effects, maternal condition, maternal grief**
- The evolution of skin pigmentation-associated variation in West Eurasia. Dan Ju and Iain Mathieson. PNAS January 5, 2021 118 (1) e2009227118; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2009227118 **skin pigmentation, polygenic selection, complex traits, evolution, ancient DNA**
- The decline of mammal functional and evolutionary diversity worldwide. Jedediah F. Brodie,  Sara Williams, and Brittany Garner. PNAS January 19, 2021 118 (3) e1921849118; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1921849118 **bushmeat hunting, conservation, habitat loss, phylogenetic diversity, harvest**
- Fitness maps to a large-effect locus in introduced stickleback populations. Dolph Schluter,  Kerry B. Marchinko, Matthew E. Arnegard, Haili Zhang, Shannon D. Brady,  Felicity C. Jones, Michael A. Bell, and David M. Kingsley. PNAS January 19, 2021 118 (3) e1914889118; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1914889118 **genetics of adaptation, stickleback, natural selection, Ectodysplasin, fitness mapping**


## Theor Popul Biol
Nothing this month


## Picks summary

Two themes that dominated:
1. Inferring the genetic variants involved in polygenic traits, and measuring polygenic selection
    - Mathieson et al. (2021) PNAS
    - Lee et al. (2021) Am J Hum Genet
    - Stern et al. (2021) Am J Hum Genet *
2. Genetic relatedness in the genomics era: haplotypes and the importance of recombination, sex differences in recombination, crossover interference.
    - Veller et al. (2020) Genetics *
    - Qiao et al. (2021) Am J Hum Genet

- Stern et al. (2021) Am J Hum Genet. We present a full-likelihood method to infer polygenic adaptation from DNA sequence variation and GWAS summary statistics to quantify recent transient directional selection acting on a complex trait. Through simulations of polygenic trait architecture evolution and GWASs, we show the method substantially improves power over current methods. We examine the robustness of the method under stratification, uncertainty and bias in marginal effects, uncertainty in the causal SNPs, allelic heterogeneity, negative selection, and low GWAS sample size. The method can quantify selection acting on correlated traits, controlling for pleiotropy even among traits with strong genetic correlation (∣∣rg∣∣=80%) while retaining high power to attribute selection to the causal trait. When the causal trait is excluded from analysis, selection is attributed to its closest proxy. We discuss limitations of the method, cautioning against strongly causal interpretations of the results, and the possibility of undetectable gene-by-environment (GxE) interactions. We apply the method to 56 human polygenic traits, revealing signals of directional selection on pigmentation, life history, glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c), and other traits. We also conduct joint testing of 137 pairs of genetically correlated traits, revealing widespread correlated response acting on these traits (2.6-fold enrichment, p = 1.5 × 10−7). Signs of selection on some traits previously reported as adaptive (e.g., educational attainment and hair color) are largely attributable to correlated response (p = 2.9 × 10−6 and 1.7 × 10−4, respectively). Lastly, our joint test shows antagonistic selection has increased type 2 diabetes risk and decrease HbA1c (p = 1.5 × 10−5).
- Veller et al. (2020) Genetics: The genomic proportion that two relatives share identically by descent — their genetic relatedness — can vary depending on the history of recombination and segregation in their pedigree. Previous calculations of the variance of genetic relatedness have defined genetic relatedness as the proportion of total genetic map length (cM) shared by relatives, and have neglected crossover interference and sex differences in recombination. Here, we consider genetic relatedness as the proportion of the total physical genome (bp) shared by relatives, and calculate its variance for general pedigree relationships, making no assumptions about the recombination process. For the relationships of grandparent-grandoffspring and siblings, the variance of genetic relatedness is a simple decreasing function of \bar{r}, the average proportion of locus pairs that recombine in meiosis. For general pedigree relationships, the variance of genetic relatedness is a function of metrics analogous to \bar{r}. Therefore, features of the aggregate recombination process that affect \bar{r} and analogs also affect variance in genetic relatedness. Such features include the number of chromosomes and heterogeneity in their size, the number of crossovers and their spatial organization along chromosomes, and sex differences in recombination. Our calculations help to explain several recent observations about variance in genetic relatedness, including that it is reduced by crossover interference (which is known to increase \bar{r}). Our methods further allow us to calculate the neutral variance of ancestry among F2s in a hybrid cross, enabling precise statistical inference in F2-based tests for various kinds of selection.


## Picks by others

Domi:
- Taxonomically unbiased strategy for biodiversity research in terms of funding by the Lives projects. Proc. R. Soc. Biology
- Maternal resource allocation to twins and siblings.
- Tomato research: *S. chilense* geographically mediated response to pathogens. Spatially heterogeneity in response to pathogens (resistance specificity). doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2020.2723
- Spatial synchrony vs. environmental synchrony in the white tailed deer. Cycling. Ecology Letters
- Alibaba consortium developed an app called "Ant Forest"

Thomas:
- Das et al. Draft genome of common snapping turtle. G3
- Kechin. Multiplex PCR primers for amplicon data. PLoS Comput Biol.
- Limits of plant domestication: Stetter (2020) https://doi.org/10.1002/ajb2.1585

Mathieu:
- Franz et al. (2021) Dire wolfs, last lineage of a group (?). Nature
- Meisner et al. (2021). Inference of population structure in the presence of missing data. Bioinformatics

Alice:
- Human presence and activity effects on giraffe

Christine:
- Adaptation in humans to high altitude in the Himalayans. eLife
- November group. New method to visualise population structure data. eLife
- Disentangling genetics from environments on GWAS. eLife

Xenia M.:
- Boreal toads and fungus infections and help in clearing infections. American Naturalist

Xenia W.:
- Kyriazis et. al. Deleterious mutations, extinction risks, inbreeding depression, rescue. Evol Letters.
- Reid et al. (2021) Immigration counter-acts local micro-evolution; hybrid vigor and then reduction in fitness. Evolution !!!