# Monthly Journal Review June 2021

Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
- Nothing this month.

## Genetics
- Nothing (yet?) this month.


## PLoS Biol
- A return-on-investment approach for prioritization of rigorous taxonomic research needed to inform responses to the biodiversity crisis. Melville J, Chapple DG, Keogh JS, Sumner J, Amey A, et al. (2021) A return-on-investment approach for prioritization of rigorous taxonomic research needed to inform responses to the biodiversity crisis. PLOS Biology 19(6): e3001210. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001210 **biodiversity loss, undocumented species, taxonomic research, conservation biology**


## PNAS
- Aging as a consequence of selection to reduce the environmental risk of dying. Stig W. Omholt and Thomas B. L. Kirkwood. PNAS June 1, 2021 118 (22) e2102088118; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2102088118 **aging, senescence, life-history modelling, mortality risk, evolution**
- The history and evolution of the Denisovan-EPAS1 haplotype in Tibetans. Xinjun Zhang,  Kelsey E. Witt,  Mayra M. Bañuelos, Amy Ko, Kai Yuan,  Shuhua Xu, Rasmus Nielsen, and  Emilia Huerta-Sanchez. PNAS June 1, 2021 118 (22) e2020803118; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2020803118 **adaptation, archaic introgression, high altitude, natural selection, admixture** *Pick*
- Setting ethical limits on human gene editing after the fall of the somatic/germline barrier. John H. Evans. PNAS June 1, 2021 118 (22) e2004837117; first published April 30, 2021; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2004837117 **human gene editing, bioethics, germline, slippery slope**
- The persistent threat of emerging plant disease pandemics to global food security. Jean B. Ristaino,  Pamela K. Anderson,  Daniel P. Bebber,  Kate A. Brauman,  Nik J. Cunniffe, Nina V. Fedoroff,  Cambria Finegold, Karen A. Garrett,  Christopher A. Gilligan,  Christopher M. Jones,  Michael D. Martin,  Graham K. MacDonald,  Patricia Neenan,  Angela Records,  David G. Schmale,  Laura Tateosian, and  Qingshan Wei. PNAS June 8, 2021 118 (23) e2022239118; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2022239118 **emerging plant disease, plant pathology, food security**
- Herded and hunted goat genomes from the dawn of domestication in the Zagros Mountains. Kevin G. Daly,  Valeria Mattiangeli, Andrew J. Hare,  Hossein Davoudi,  Homa Fathi,  Sanaz Beizaee Doost,  Sarieh Amiri,  Roya Khazaeli,  Delphine Decruyenaere, Jebrael Nokandeh,  Tobias Richter, Hojjat Darabi, Peder Mortensen, Alexis Pantos,  Lisa Yeomans,  Pernille Bangsgaard,  Marjan Mashkour,  Melinda A. Zeder, and  Daniel G. Bradley. PNAS June 22, 2021 118 (25) e2100901118; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2100901118 **caprine, ancient DNA, Neolithic, domestication, archaeozoology** *Pick*

## Theor Popul Biol
- Nothing this month

## Picks summary

## Picks by others
