# Monthly Journal Review July and August 2021

Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
- Nothing this month.

## Genetics
- Nothing (yet?) this month.


## PLoS Biol
- A return-on-investment approach for prioritization of rigorous taxonomic research needed to inform responses to the biodiversity crisis. Melville J, Chapple DG, Keogh JS, Sumner J, Amey A, et al. (2021) A return-on-investment approach for prioritization of rigorous taxonomic research needed to inform responses to the biodiversity crisis. PLOS Biology 19(6): e3001210. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001210 **biodiversity loss, undocumented species, taxonomic research, conservation biology**


## PNAS
- Aging as a consequence of selection to reduce the environmental risk of dying. Stig W. Omholt and Thomas B. L. Kirkwood. PNAS June 1, 2021 118 (22) e2102088118; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2102088118 **aging, senescence, life-history modelling, mortality risk, evolution**
-...

## Theor Popul Biol
- Rui J. Costa, Hilde M. Wilkinson-Herbots, Inference of gene flow in the process of speciation: Efficient maximum-likelihood implementation of a generalised isolation-with-migration model, Theoretical Population Biology, Volume 140, 2021, Pages 1-15, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tpb.2021.03.001. **maximum likelihood, structured coalescent, speciation with gene flow**

## Picks summary

## Picks by others
