# Monthly Journal Review January 2021

Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
Nothing this month.

## Genetics
- Richard J Wang, Predrag Radivojac, Matthew W Hahn, Distinct error rates for reference and nonreference genotypes estimated by pedigree analysis, Genetics, Volume 217, Issue 1, January 2021, Pages 1–10, https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyaa014 **genotyping errors, error types, pedigree, owl monkey, homozygous reference sites, haplotypic phase calling**
- April L Peterson, Bret A Payseur, Sex-specific variation in the genome-wide recombination rate, Genetics, Volume 217, Issue 1, January 2021, Pages 1–11, https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyaa019 **heterochiasmy, meiosis recombination, sexual dimorphism**


## PLoS Biol
Nothing this month.

## PNAS
- Human casualties are the dominant cost of human–wildlife conflict in India. Sumeet Gulati,  Krithi K. Karanth, Nguyet Anh Le, and  Frederik Noack. PNAS February 23, 2021 118 (8) e1921338118; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1921338118 **human–wildlife conflict, human casualities, conservation, protected areas, megafauna**
- Ancient DNA and multimethod dating confirm the late arrival of anatomically modern humans in southern China. Xue-feng Sun,  Shao-qing Wen, Cheng-qiu Lu, Bo-yan Zhou,  Darren Curnoe,  Hua-yu Lu,  Hong-chun Li, Wei Wang,  Hai Cheng, Shuang-wen Yi,  Xin Jia, Pan-xin Du,  Xing-hua Xu, Yi-ming Lu, Ying Lu, Hong-xiang Zheng, Hong Zhang, Chang Sun, Lan-hai Wei, Fei Han, Juan Huang, R. Lawrence Edwards, Li Jin, and Hui Li. PNAS February 23, 2021 118 (8) e2019158118; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2019158118 **anatomically modern humans, Late Pleistocene, East Asia, ancient DNA, dating**
- A genomic region associated with protection against severe COVID-19 is inherited from Neandertals. Hugo Zeberg and  Svante Pääbo. PNAS March 2, 2021 118 (9) e2026309118; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2026309118 **Neandertals, COVID-19, OAS1, SARS-CoV-2**
- The inflated significance of neutral genetic diversity in conservation genetics. João C. Teixeira and  Christian D. Huber. PNAS March 9, 2021 118 (10) e2015096118; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2015096118 **conservation genetics, adaptive potential, inbreeding depression, genetic load, species extinction**
- Deep time diversity and the early radiations of birds. Yilun Yu,  Chi Zhang, and Xing Xu. PNAS March 9, 2021 118 (10) e2019865118; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2019865118 **birds, biodiversity, radiation, diversification rate, morphological evolution**
- Vaccinating the oldest against COVID-19 saves both the most lives and most years of life. Joshua R. Goldstein,  Thomas Cassidy, and  Kenneth W. Wachter. PNAS March 16, 2021 118 (11) e2026322118; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2026322118 **demography, COVID-19, vaccine, years of life lost, age**
- Reevaluating the timing of Neanderthal disappearance in Northwest Europe. Thibaut Devièse,  Grégory Abrams, Mateja Hajdinjak,  Stéphane Pirson,  Isabelle De Groote, Kévin Di Modica, Michel Toussaint,  Valentin Fischer, Dan Comeskey, Luke Spindler, Matthias Meyer, Patrick Semal, and Tom Higham. PNAS March 23, 2021 118 (12) e2022466118; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2022466118 **Neanderthal disappearance, Belgium, compound-specific radiocarbon dating, ancient genomic analysis**

## Theor Popul Biol
Nothing this month.

## Picks summary

### Wang et al. (2021) Genetics: Distinct error rates for reference and nonreference genotypes estimated by pedigree analysis
- Abstract: Errors in genotype calling can have perverse effects on genetic analyses, confounding association studies, and obscuring rare variants. Analyses now routinely incorporate error rates to control for spurious findings. However, reliable estimates of the error rate can be difficult to obtain because of their variance between studies. Most studies also report only a single estimate of the error rate even though genotypes can be miscalled in more than one way. Here, we report a method for estimating the rates at which different types of genotyping errors occur at biallelic loci using pedigree information. Our method identifies potential genotyping errors by exploiting instances where the haplotypic phase has not been faithfully transmitted. The expected frequency of inconsistent phase depends on the combination of genotypes in a pedigree and the probability of miscalling each genotype. We develop a model that uses the differences in these frequencies to estimate rates for different types of genotype error. Simulations show that our method accurately estimates these error rates in a variety of scenarios. We apply this method to a dataset from the whole-genome sequencing of owl monkeys (Aotus nancymaae) in three-generation pedigrees. We find significant differences between estimates for different types of genotyping error, with the most common being homozygous reference sites miscalled as heterozygous and vice versa. The approach we describe is applicable to any set of genotypes where haplotypic phase can reliably be called and should prove useful in helping to control for false discoveries.

#### Peterson & Payseur (2021) Genetics: Sex-specific variation in the genome-wide recombination rate
- Abstract: n most species that reproduce sexually, successful gametogenesis requires recombination during meiosis. The number and placement of crossovers (COs) vary among individuals, with females and males often presenting the most striking contrasts. Despite the recognition that the sexes recombine at different rates (heterochiasmy), existing data fail to answer the question of whether patterns of genetic variation in recombination rate are similar in the two sexes. To fill this gap, we measured the genome-wide recombination rate in both sexes from a panel of wild-derived inbred strains from multiple subspecies of house mice (Mus musculus) and from a few additional species of Mus. To directly compare recombination rates in females and males from the same genetic backgrounds, we applied established methods based on immunolocalization of recombination proteins to inbred strains. Our results reveal discordant patterns of genetic variation in the two sexes. Whereas male genome-wide recombination rates vary substantially among strains, female recombination rates measured in the same strains are more static. The direction of heterochiasmy varies within two subspecies, Mus musculus molossinus and Mus musculus musculus. The direction of sex differences in the length of the synaptonemal complex and CO positions is consistent across strains and does not track sex differences in genome-wide recombination rate. In males, contrasts between strains with high recombination rate and strains with low recombination rate suggest more recombination is associated with stronger CO interference and more double-strand breaks. The sex-specific patterns of genetic variation we report underscore the importance of incorporating sex differences into recombination research.

#### Teixeira & Huber (2021) PNAS: The inflated significance of neutral genetic diversity in conservation genetics
- Abstract: The current rate of species extinction is rapidly approaching unprecedented highs, and life on Earth presently faces a sixth mass extinction event driven by anthropogenic activity, climate change, and ecological collapse. The field of conservation genetics aims at preserving species by using their levels of genetic diversity, usually measured as neutral genome-wide diversity, as a barometer for evaluating population health and extinction risk. A fundamental assumption is that higher levels of genetic diversity lead to an increase in fitness and long-term survival of a species. Here, we argue against the perceived importance of neutral genetic diversity for the conservation of wild populations and species. We demonstrate that no simple general relationship exists between neutral genetic diversity and the risk of species extinction. Instead, a better understanding of the properties of functional genetic diversity, demographic history, and ecological relationships is necessary for developing and implementing effective conservation genetic strategies.


## Picks by others