# Monthly Journal Review July and August 2021

Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
- The National Academies’ Roundtable on Genomics and Precision Health: Where we have been and where we are heading. Ginsburg et al. The American Journal of Human Genetics, Volume 108, Issue 10, 1817–1822, https://10.1016/j.ajhg.2021.08.015 **precision health, innovation, dialogue, equity, and adoption, roundtable, human health** *Pick*
- An integrated approach to identify environmental modulators of genetic risk factors for complex traits. Balliu et al. The American Journal of Human Genetics, Volume 108, Issue 10, 1866–1879, https://10.1016/j.ajhg.2021.08.014 **GWAS; colocalization; eQTL; gene expression; gene-by-environment interactions**
- Fast two-stage phasing of large-scale sequence data. Browning et al. The American Journal of Human Genetics, Volume 108, Issue 10, 1880–1890, https://10.1016/j.ajhg.2021.08.005 **TOPMed; UK Biobank; genotype phasing; haplotype phasing; phasing** *Pick*

## Genetics
- Nothing (yet) this month.


## PLoS Biol
- Mollentze N, Babayan SA, Streicker DG (2021) Identifying and prioritizing potential human-infecting viruses from their genome sequences. PLOS Biology 19(9): e3001390. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001390 **animal viruses, virus discovery, machine learning, zoonosis, virus taxonomy, preadaptation, nonhuman primates, SARS, SARS-Cov-2, zoonotic risk assessment** *Pick*
- Okeke IN (2021) Twenty steps to ingrain power asymmetry in global health biomedical research. PLOS Biology 19(9): e3001411. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001411 **health research, biometical research, satirical comment, low-income countries, high-income countries**


## PNAS
- Urbanization extends flight phenology and leads to local adaptation of seasonal plasticity in Lepidoptera. Thomas Merckx, Matthew E. Nielsen, Janne Heliölä, Mikko Kuussaari, Lars B. Pettersson, Juha Pöyry, Juha Tiainen, Karl Gotthard, Sami M. Kivelä. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences Oct 2021, 118 (40) e2106006118; DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2106006118 **artificial light at night; diapause; reaction norm; urban evolution; urban heat island effect**
- False discovery rate control in genome-wide association studies with population structure. Matteo Sesia, Stephen Bates, Emmanuel Candès, Jonathan Marchini, Chiara Sabatti. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences Oct 2021, 118 (40) e2105841118; DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2105841118 **false discovery rate; genome-wide association studies; hidden Markov models; knockoffs; population structure**
- A conserved genetic architecture among populations of the maize progenitor, teosinte, was radically altered by domestication. Qiuyue Chen, Luis Fernando Samayoa, Chin Jian Yang, Bode A. Olukolu, Alessandra M. York, Jose de Jesus Sanchez-Gonzalez, Wei Xue, Jeffrey C. Glaubitz, Peter J. Bradbury, Maria Cinta Romay, Qi Sun, Edward S. Buckler, James B. Holland, John F. Doebley. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences Oct 2021, 118 (43) e2112970118; DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2112970118 **domestication; evolution; maize; selection; teosinte** *Pick*
- Also note: Special Issue on Tropical forests as key sites of the "Anthropocene": Past and present perspectives. Introduction: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2109243118

## Theor Popul Biol
- Nothing (yet) this month.

## Picks summary

### The National Academies’ Roundtable on Genomics and Precision Health: Where we have been and where we are heading. Ginsburg et al. The American Journal of Human Genetics, Volume 108, Issue 10, 1817–1822, https://10.1016/j.ajhg.2021.08.015 **precision health, innovation, dialogue, equity, and adoption, roundtable, human health** *Pick*
>> See also: satirical commentary by Okeke IN (2021): Twenty steps to ingrain power asymmetry in global health biomedical research. PLoS Biology.

The clinical application of genetics and genomics to advance precision health is one of the most dynamic and promising areas of medicine. In 2020, building on nearly 15 years of work, the Roundtable on Genomics and Precision Health of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine undertook a strategic planning process to assess its strengths, consider the current challenges facing the field, and set out new goals for its future work. As a result, the Roundtable has updated its vision and mission and prioritized four major **areas of inquiry**— innovation, dialogue, equity, and adoption — while keeping true to its founding goal of providing a neutral convening space for the diversity of stakeholders in genomics and precision health. The Roundtable is unique for its breadth of membership and is committed to fostering a new era for precision health built on decades of expanding knowledge and the emergence of new technologies. To achieve its goals, the Roundtable seeks to broaden its membership’s diversity and to engage with new audiences. Roundtable members explore how evidence-based discoveries in genomics could be adopted and used in innovative ways to better serve human health, how equitable access to genomic and precision health technologies can be ensured, and how the Roundtable and broader genomics and precision health community can communicate more effectively to inform the public regarding genomics and precision health. As a first principle, the Roundtable is working to support the overall goal that all people benefit from genomics for precision health.
 
### Fast two-stage phasing of large-scale sequence data. Browning et al. The American Journal of Human Genetics, Volume 108, Issue 10, 1880–1890, https://10.1016/j.ajhg.2021.08.005 **TOPMed; UK Biobank; genotype phasing; haplotype phasing; phasing** *Pick*

Haplotype phasing is the estimation of haplotypes from genotype data. We present a fast, accurate, and memory-efficient haplotype phasing method that **scales to large-scale SNP array and sequence data**. The method uses marker windowing and composite reference haplotypes to reduce memory usage and computation time. It incorporates a **progressive phasing algorithm** that identifies confidently phased heterozygotes in each iteration and fixes the phase of these heterozygotes in subsequent iterations. For data with many low-frequency variants, such as whole-genome sequence data, the method employs a **two-stage phasing algorithm** that phases high-frequency markers via progressive phasing in the first stage and phases low-frequency markers via genotype imputation in the second stage. This haplotype phasing method is implemented in the open-source Beagle 5.2 software package. We compare Beagle 5.2 and SHAPEIT 4.2.1 by using expanding subsets of 485,301 UK Biobank samples and 38,387 TOPMed samples. Both methods have very similar accuracy and computation time for UK Biobank SNP array data. However, for TOPMed sequence data, Beagle is more than 20 times faster than SHAPEIT, achieves similar accuracy, and scales to larger sample sizes.

### Mollentze N, Babayan SA, Streicker DG (2021) Identifying and prioritizing potential human-infecting viruses from their genome sequences. PLOS Biology 19(9): e3001390. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001390 **animal viruses, virus discovery, machine learning, zoonosis, virus taxonomy, preadaptation, nonhuman primates, SARS, SARS-Cov-2, zoonotic risk assessment** *Pick*

Determining which animal viruses may be capable of infecting humans is currently intractable at the time of their discovery, precluding prioritization of high-risk viruses for early investigation and outbreak preparedness. Given the increasing use of genomics in virus discovery and the otherwise sparse knowledge of the biology of newly discovered viruses, we developed machine learning models that identify candidate zoonoses solely using signatures of host range encoded in viral genomes. Within a dataset of 861 viral species with known zoonotic status, our approach outperformed models based on the phylogenetic relatedness of viruses to known human-infecting viruses (area under the receiver operating characteristic curve [AUC] = 0.773), distinguishing high-risk viruses within families that contain a minority of human-infecting species and identifying putatively undetected or so far unrealized zoonoses. Analyses of the underpinnings of model predictions suggested the existence of generalizable features of viral genomes that are independent of virus taxonomic relationships and that may preadapt viruses to infect humans. Our model reduced a second set of 645 animal-associated viruses that were excluded from training to 272 high and 41 very high-risk candidate zoonoses and showed significantly elevated predicted zoonotic risk in viruses from nonhuman primates, but not other mammalian or avian host groups. A second application showed that our models could have identified Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) as a relatively high-risk coronavirus strain and that this prediction required no prior knowledge of zoonotic Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS)-related coronaviruses. Genome-based zoonotic risk assessment provides a rapid, low-cost approach to enable evidence-driven virus surveillance and increases the feasibility of downstream biological and ecological characterization of viruses.

### A conserved genetic architecture among populations of the maize progenitor, teosinte, was radically altered by domestication. Qiuyue Chen, Luis Fernando Samayoa, Chin Jian Yang, Bode A. Olukolu, Alessandra M. York, Jose de Jesus Sanchez-Gonzalez, Wei Xue, Jeffrey C. Glaubitz, Peter J. Bradbury, Maria Cinta Romay, Qi Sun, Edward S. Buckler, James B. Holland, John F. Doebley. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences Oct 2021, 118 (43) e2112970118; DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2112970118 **domestication; evolution; maize; selection; teosinte** *Pick*

Significance

We investigated the genetic architecture of maize domestication using a quantitative genetics approach. With multiple populations of teosinte and maize, we also compared the genetic architecture among populations within maize and teosinte. We showed that genetic architecture among populations within teosinte or maize is generally conserved, in contrast to the radical differences between teosinte and maize. Our results suggest that while selection drove changes in essentially all traits between teosinte and maize, selection is far less important for explaining domestication trait differences among populations within teosinte or maize.

Abstract

Very little is known about how domestication was constrained by the quantitative genetic architecture of crop progenitors and how quantitative genetic architecture was altered by domestication. Yang et al. [C. J. Yang et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 116, 5643–5652 (2019)] drew multiple conclusions about how genetic architecture influenced and was altered by maize domestication based on one sympatric pair of teosinte and maize populations. To test the generality of their conclusions, we assayed the structure of genetic variances, genetic correlations among traits, strength of selection during domestication, and diversity in genetic architecture within teosinte and maize. Our results confirm that additive genetic variance is decreased, while dominance genetic variance is increased, during maize domestication. The genetic correlations are moderately conserved among traits between teosinte and maize, while the genetic variance–covariance matrices (G-matrices) of teosinte and maize are quite different, primarily due to changes in the submatrix for reproductive traits. The inferred long-term selection intensities during domestication were weak, and the neutral hypothesis was rejected for reproductive and environmental response traits, suggesting that they were targets of selection during domestication. The G-matrix of teosinte imposed considerable constraint on selection during the early domestication process, and constraint increased further along the domestication trajectory. Finally, we assayed variation among populations and observed that genetic architecture is generally conserved among populations within teosinte and maize but is radically different between teosinte and maize. While selection drove changes in essentially all traits between teosinte and maize, selection explains little of the difference in domestication traits among populations within teosinte or maize.

## Picks by others

Mathieu:
- Neanderthal introgression: Findley et al. (2021) PLoS Genetics

Thomas:
- Pavlik et al. (2021) Am J Bot Evidence for human-caused founder effect in populations of *Solanum jamesii* found at archeological sites

Xenia:
- Parthogenesis in Californian condors

Christine:
- Evolutionary Applications: Human-induced evolution
    - Hatchery vs. natural environment inducing changes in epigenome. No genetic difference?
    - Hybridisation in grey wolves: what regions in the genome introgressed from free-ranging domestic dogs into wolf

Gözde:
Ecology and Evolution
- Pre-print publishing more prominent among academically younger scientists