# Monthly Journal Review January 2021

Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
Nothing this month.

## Genetics
Nothing this month.


## PLoS Biol
- Harpak A, Przeworski M (2021) The evolution of group differences in changing environments. PLoS Biol 19(1): e3001072. https:// doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001072 **complex traits, group differences, local adaptation, humans, stabilising selection, shifting environmental effects, polygenic scores** *Pick*
- Sauppe S, Choudhary KK, Giroud N, Blasi DE, Norcliffe E, Bhattamishra S, et al. (2021) Neural signatures of syntactic variation in speech planning. PLoS Biol 19(1): e3001038. https://doi. org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001038 **linguistics, speech planning, syntax, sentence planning, special marking, aligned expression, nonaligned expression, production flexibility, production fluency, sentence comprehension, neurophysiology**

## PNAS
- Ecological adaptation in European eels is based on phenotypic plasticity. Erik D. Enbody,  Mats E. Pettersson, C. Grace Sprehn,  Stefan Palm,  Håkan Wickström, and  Leif Andersson. PNAS January 26, 2021 118 (4) e2022620118; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2022620118 **adaptation, panmixia, plasticity, genome biology**
- Evolution in the weak-mutation limit: Stasis periods punctuated by fast transitions between saddle points on the fitness landscape. Yuri Bakhtin,  Mikhail I. Katsnelson, Yuri I. Wolf, and  Eugene V. Koonin. PNAS January 26, 2021 118 (4) e2015665118; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2015665118 **fitness landscapes; low mutation limit; punctuated equilibrium; saddle points; self-organized criticality**
- Energetics and fear of humans constrain the spatial ecology of pumas. Barry A. Nickel,  Justin P. Suraci,  Anna C. Nisi, and  Christopher C. Wilmers. PNAS February 2, 2021 118 (5) e2004592118; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2004592118. **ecology of fear, energy landscape, movement ecology, large carnivore, accelerometry** *Pick*
- Genomic evolution of antibiotic resistance is contingent on genetic background following a long-term experiment with *Escherichia coli*. Kyle J. Card, Misty D. Thomas,  Joseph L. Graves Jr,  Jeffrey E. Barrick, and  Richard E. Lenski. PNAS February 2, 2021 118 (5) e2016886118; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2016886118. **antimicrobial resistance; epistasis; experimental evolution; historical contingency; parallel evolution**
- Science and Culture: Expedition artists paint a picture of science exploration. Carolyn Beans. PNAS February 9, 2021 118 (6) e2026315118; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2026315118 **science, culture, scientific expeditions, painters, abstraction, science for the public**
- The mutational load in natural populations is significantly affected by high primary rates of retroposition. Wenyu Zhang,  Chen Xie,  Kristian Ullrich,  Yong E. Zhang, and  Diethard Tautz. PNAS February 9, 2021 118 (6) e2013043118; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2013043118 **gene retroposition rate; genetic load; house mouse; natural population; selection**
- Opinion: A better approach for dealing with reproducibility and replicability in science. James D. Nichols,  Madan K. Oli, William. L. Kendall, and G. Scott Boomer. PNAS February 16, 2021 118 (7) e2100769118; https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2100769118 **reproducibility, replicability, research synthesis, series of studies, predictive ability**


## Theor Popul Biol
- Commentary: What the reproductive number R0 can and cannot tell us about COVID-19 dynamics. Clara L. Shaw, David A. Kennedy. Theor. Popul. Biol. 137:2–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tpb.2020.12.003 **R; COVID-19; Epidemic size; Heterogeneity; Interventions; SARS-CoV-2** *Pick*
- Computing the probability of gene trees concordant with the species tree in the multispecies coalescent. Jakub Truszkowski, Celine Scornavacca, Fabio Pardi. Theor. Popul. Biol. 137:22–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tpb.2020.12.002 **Coalescent; Dynamic programming; Gene tree; Incomplete lineage sorting; Multispecies coalescent; Species tree**

## Picks summary

### Harpak & Przeworski: The evolution of group differences in changing environments
- Selection pressures driving evolution of complex traits in humans remain unknown and/or contentious.
- Interest mostly on traits that differ in their mean among groups (populations)
- Mean trait differences: Genetic basis? Fitness consequence or evolved by drift only? Under locally different selection pressures?
- Alternative proposed: Complex traits evolve under stabilising selection in the face of shifting environmental effects. Under this scenarios, loci that contribute to trait variation evolve rapidly even when trait optima remain.
- Highlights importance of assumptions made about environmental effects.
- Under what conditions should we expect the true, heritable component of trait variation to differ among groups and what, if anything, can we learn from genetic differences about the selection pressures that shaped trait differences?
- Example: human height. Environmental, genes, and interactions.
- Detail of hypothesis:  That the trait is under ongoing stabilizing selection, i.e., that there exists a stable optimal trait value and selection against values far from it. As we outline, under stabiliz- ing selection for a fixed trait optimum, shifting environmental effects on the trait will lead to rapid changes in frequency at loci that influence trait variation. In other words, there will be transient polygenic adaptation even in the absence of a change in trait optimum.
- Whether a trait has no fitness consequences, its fitness optimum recently changed, or its fitness optimum has remained the same in the face of shifting environmental effects, we should expect mean polygenic effects to evolve. Therefore, a shift in polygenic effects does not imply that the trait optimum has changed. Nor does it follow, without strong assumptions about environ- mental effects, that trait value changes will mirror the direction or magnitude of the genetic changes.
- Such considerations apply to any organism (e.g., [105,111]), but are particularly consequen- tial for humans and other nonexperimental species. They underscore the importance of adap- tation studies in which environmental effects can be rendered identical, as done in common garden experiments for example. In humans, however, even when current limitations of PGS are overcome, the absence of knowledge of the salient environmental effects (and possibly also their interaction with genetics) may generate a fundamental interpretative ambiguity.

### Shaw & Kennedy: Commentary – What the reproductive number R0 can and cannot tell us about COVID-19 dynamics
- Particularly apparent with the emergent pandemic virus SARS-CoV-2, the causative agent of COVID-19. We address some misconceptions about the predictive ability of the reproductive number, focusing on how it changes over time, varies over space, and relates to epidemic size by referencing the mathematical definition of R and examples from the current pandemic.
- Misconception 1: The reproductive number alone explains future dynamics. R0 and R cannot fully explain future dynamics under particular circumstances. We discuss two imporant situations in which their value is limited: first, when hosts become aware of infection and alter their behavior, and second, when individual infection risk is heterogeneous.
- Misconception 2: The reproductive number is constant over space. The R0 of many pathogens are often referred to as known values. For example, the R0 of measles is 12–14, polio is 5–7, and pertussis is 12–17 (Doherty et al., 2016). For SARS-CoV-2, estimates typically range from 2–3 (Liu et al., 2020a). However, the parameters (k [rate of contact with S], b [probability that contact results in infection], and P [duration of infection] in Eq. (1)) that make up R0 can differ substantially from place to place (Figure 1, Delamater et al., 2019). It follows that interventions to reduce R to less than 1 may need to vary in aggressiveness across locations (Stier et al., 2020).
- Misconception 3: The reproductive number is enough to tell us how large an epidemic will be.  Indeed, R0 is related to final epidemic size (Kermack and McKendrick, 1927), but this relationship can be substantially affected by the fraction of the population infected initially and by heterogeneity in transmission. The final size equation above does not apply to populations with heterogeneous infection risks (social networks, behaviour,...).

## Picks by others