{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1561\cocoasubrtf400
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\csgray\c0;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf2 From: "The American Naturalist" <em@editorialmanager.com>\
Subject: Thank you for reviewing  58395\
Date: 5 June 2018 at 00:49:01 CEST\
To: "Simon Aeschbacher" <simon.aeschbacher@ieu.uzh.ch>\
Reply-To: "The American Naturalist" <amnat@press.uchicago.edu>\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec3 Dear Dr. Aeschbacher,\
\
Thank you for reviewing the article "Ecological genetic conflict between specialism and plasticity through genomic islands of divergence". As you can see in the decision letter below, we have requested a revision of the manuscript.\
\
Attachments are also available in the Editorial Manager system if you log into the system with your reviewer role.\
\
Please keep all comments, including your own, confidential. Thank you very much for participating in our review process. The integrity of The American Naturalist depends on the efforts of devoted individuals such as yourself, and we appreciate your contribution.\
\
Yours sincerely,\
\
Daniel I Bolnick\
Editor-in-Chief\
American Naturalist\
\
---------------------------------\
\
To: ********\
From: "The American Naturalist" amnat@press.uchicago.edu\
Subject: Decision on Manuscript 58395\
MS #58395\
\
To the Authors:\
\
One of our Associate Editors (Roger Butlin), two reviewers, and I have now read your manuscript. At this time, the Editorial Board is unsure of the manuscript's suitability for The American Naturalist. Consequently, we will require a major revision of your manuscript "Ecological genetic conflict between specialism and plasticity through genomic islands of divergence" \'a0before we can make a decision. Your revision will be subject to review. \
\
Below you will find an exceptionally detailed and thoughtful recommendation from Dr. Butlin as well as two lengthy reviews. It is hard for me to add much to such extensive and constructive feedback, so I will simply refer you to the reviews and ask that you carefully consider their many valuable points and revise your manuscript accordingly. Our goal, as always, with so many comments, is to improve the readability and scientific accuracy and clarity of the work, to have as great an impact as possible.\
\
I want to be completely straightforward about this manuscript's prospects. On one hand, the manuscript seems to have the potential to meet the Naturalist's goals. On the other hand, serious objections have been raised and the Editorial Board is uncertain whether these objections can be met. Therefore, I want to encourage revision of this manuscript, but I also need to be clear that, even in revised form, the manuscript ultimately may not be accepted.\
\
Please be careful in your revision not to add to the length, and any ability to condense a bit here and there would be appreciated. The American Naturalist believes in principle that a paper should 'be as long as it needs to be'. However, because of a heavy rate of submission of excellent papers, there is an extreme competition for space, so we are forced to consider the value of a paper relative to the number of pages it requires. Therefore an idea needs to be presented concisely to maximize its probability of success in publication.\
\
Remember that if this paper is ultimately accepted for publication, depositing the data set from this paper in a public data repository such as Dryad (http://datadryad.org) is a requirement for publication. \'a0We encourage authors to begin developing the data set to be deposited now, so that the final publication process will not be delayed. \
\
Please submit your revised manuscript to the AmNat web peer review website within 60 days. Please upload a detailed response to reviewers explaining your responses to the comments. To maintain double blind review (unless you opt out), please do not write the responses as a cover letter with identifying information. This letter will be available to any subsequent reviewers, so do avoid identifying yourselves if you wish to maintain double blind anonymity. \
\
Thank you for submitting your work to The American Naturalist. I look forward to seeing the revised version of your manuscript soon.\
\
Sincerely,\
\
Daniel I. Bolnick\
Editor-in-Chief\
\
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx\
ASSOCIATE EDITOR'S RECOMMENDATION\
\
This MS makes some novel and interesting points about the interaction between local adaptation and phenotypic plasticity. Specifically, it addresses the impact of different rates of recombination between loci influencing local adaptation and loci influencing the reaction norm, finding that close linkage tends to reduce the reaction norm slope. Interestingly, the authors also investigate the evolution of recombination rates in situations where there is a trade-off between local adaptation and plasticity. Thus, the MS has new things to say in two areas of broad current interest: the genetic architecture of local adaptation and the joint evolution of local adaptation and plasticity. Both reviewers, coming from different perspectives, recognise these positive contributions.\
\
At the same time, there are several issues with the MS that need to be addressed before it is suitable for American Naturalist. First, the MS is framed in the language of \'91genetic conflict\'92. This is an unfamiliar conceptual basis for many working on local adaptation or plasticity and so the authors need to be particularly careful to make their points clearly and to establish that this way of approaching the topics they address has advantages over other approaches. At the moment, the Introduction does not achieve either objective in my view and both reviewers also had difficulties. Particular care is needed when discussing \'91genes\'92 and \'91genetic elements\'92, and their \'91evolutionary interests\'92. In many cases, it is alleles that have \'91evolutionary interests\'92 and, as reviewer 2 (Simon Aeschbacher, who chose to sign his review) points out, these interests may sometimes be more concisely described as fitness values. Linkage disequilibrium between alleles aligns their interests, rather\
than linkage aligning the interests of genes (cf line 47 et seq.). I found the genetic conflict perspective stimulating, because I had not thought about local adaptation and plasticity in this way before, but I struggled a bit with the line of argument and, like Dr Aeschbacher, with relating it to the more widespread population genetic conceptualisation. Reviewer 2 has a background in plasticity research, presumably part of the intended audience, and clearly had some difficulty with the line of argument as well. \
Secondly, the study needs to be placed more clearly in the framework of previous studies on the genetic architecture of local adaptation on the one hand (see many helpful comments in Dr Aeschbacher\'92s review) and in the context of previous work on the trade-off between local adaptation and plasticity (as mentioned by Rev. 1). This will help to focus the MS on the new aspects. I tend to agree with Dr Aeschbacher that the MS does not add a great deal to the extensive literature about genomic islands of divergence and that the focus should, therefore, be on the role of recombination in the plasticity-adaptation interaction. This increased focus would also suggest pursuing some aspects of the recombination results in greater depth, as proposed in Dr Aeshbacher\'92s specific comments. \
\
I agree with Dr Aeschbacher\'92s major point 4 that it is important to examine the dynamics of evolution for the divergently-selected \'91ecological\'92 loci. I also sympathise with his suggestion to investigate the evolution of recombination rates in more detail ([l. 309-315] C).\
\
Because of these various points, I recommend Major Revision. I suggest that the authors should extensively revise the Introduction to make the arguments concerning conflict more accessible and to place the present work more firmly in the context of previous work (which has mostly been conducted under other frameworks but is, nonetheless, important background). This will naturally lead to a focus on what is new here concerning the role of recombination and its evolution. This framework can then be carried forward to the other sections of the MS.\
\
The authors should address the many helpful comments and suggestions made by the reviewers. Below, I make a few specific comments from my own reading.\
\
136-7 \'96 presumably binomial with probability 0.5 (I think this may become clear later)\
283-290 \'96 clearly the evolution of the genetic architecture is an interesting issue, given the effect of architecture on the outcome. I would like to hear more than is given in this short paragraph. Actually, Fig. A2 does not address the interesting question of evolving recombination between the z, alpha and beta loci, rather it constrains the response to be genetic (z only) and replicates Yeaman and Whitlock\'92s result for many loci influencing genetic adaptation. (A3 does something similar.) This seems quite a serious limitation. See related comments by Rev. 2.\
Figs 2 and 5 have different migration rate axes, making comparison a bit difficult. Is this because the 2-trait case is confounded with a change in total selection? Cf line 301.\
306 \'96 were recombination rate loci unlinked to the other loci (and to one another)? How did they influence recombination? See Table 1 legend for some information (probably not enough, and the choice made here probably biases towards seeing tight z-z linkage and not tight linkage for other loci, please comment).\
373-5 \'96 need to be careful with wording here to specify exactly what is supported by the work of Samuk et al.\
\
\
Roger K. Butlin \
Associate Editor\
\
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx\
\
Reviewer #1: \
\
Leimar et al. investigate the possibly conflicting roles of genes related to local adaptation and genes related to plasticity, across heterogeneous environments. The evolution of genetic polymorphism versus phenotypic plasticity has been covered extensively. The novelty of the work is that they consider plasticity versus polymorphism in relation to genetic conflict and genetic architecture. Their major result is to show that reaction norm slopes are greater when plasticity genes are unlinked to genes responsible for local adaptation. In other words, they show these two sets of genes differ in their evolutionary interests when clustered, and are thus in conflict. \
\
In general, this manuscript adds important insights into the interplay of genomic islands of adaptation and phenotypic plasticity. It will provide a nice foundation for thinking about empirical data, whenever those data become available.On a slightly minor point, I'm not an expert in genetic conflict, but it's not obvious to me why ecological genetic conflict is any different than genetic conflict. If there is a substantive difference, please spend more time explaining it. \
\
Just a few other comments/questions that I hope will help improve the manuscript:\
The clarity of the introduction could be improved. There are some imprecisions that obscure the meaning of the thought. For example, in the first paragraph they talk about different pathways of gene transmission and then talk about nuclear versus mitochondrial. That part is clear. That's immediately followed, however, by "the biasing of transmission along a pathway, as for segregation distorters". What does the "pathway" mean here? Then this is followed two sentences later with "In heterogeneous environments, genes can differ in their pathways of transmission to future generations, involving the kinds of environments they pass through." Again, what does "pathway" mean here? \
\
Lines 30-32: This thought is not integrated with the rest of the sentence. And why would it necessarily be a noisy environmental cue?\
\
Lines 50-52: I don't quite understand this: genes are at the same position, but at different physical locations? Aren't these just linked genes? I'm not clear on the distinction they are trying to make here.\
\
Line 61: Perhaps define a genomic island of divergence first.\
\
Lines 74-5: Here again the thought about plasticity seems to be tacked on, not integrated into the concepts discussed. Why is it important that plasticity genes be considered within this context? And what specifically do they mean by a plasticity gene? Any gene that contributed to plasticity of a trait? Slope of the reaction norm and the intercept?\
\
Figure 2: What does the scale for "Modifier" mean? This should be included in the legend. \
\
Figure 3: It's a big confusing that the distribution of juvenile cue in habitat 1 is labeled, but not for habitat 2.\
\
Figure 6: Please label the x-axis.\
\
I found the discussion to be straight-forward and a nice synthesis of the results. \
\
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx\
\
Reviewer #2: \
\
## Summary\
\
Leimar et al. present a very appealing and neat study on the effect of genetic architecture - in particular, recombination - on the relative contribution of divergently selected among-habitat polymorphisms on the one hand, and modifiers of phenotypic plasticity on the other hand. Using a simple model with one or two among-habitat polymorphisms, as well as two modifiers that code for the relative contributions of these polymorphisms versus an environmental cue, the authors find that if the plasticity genes are tightly linked to the among-habitat polymorphisms, then a steeper reaction norm will evolve as compared to the case where the plasticity genes are unlinked to the among-habitat polymorphisms. The slope of the reaction norm therefore reflects how the trade-off between genetic vs. plastic response to the environment is solved, given the constraints posed by the recombination landscape. The authors then also investigate how recombination rates among and between the\
ecological polymorphism and the plasticity modifiers evolve in response to this trade-off. This analysis presents another novel contribution, although there seems to be room for a more thorough analysis of the results within the scope of the manuscript. \
\
The paper is clearly written and there are no major technical flaws. However, I do see a couple of conceptual short-comings that I think would need to be addressed before publication in Am. Nat. can be considered. In particular, there is a fundamental lack of focus on the evolution at the among-habitat polymorphisms, which hampers a complete understanding of the observed results. Moreover, the claim of enhancing our understanding of the evolution of genomic islands of divergence seems overstated, as the analyses of the evolution of genomic islands explicitly ignore the evolution of plasticity.\
\
Another potential issue is the lack of clarity about how terms such as 'evolutionary interest' that seem to be somewhat specific to the inclusive-fitness literature relate to the concepts of fitness and reproductive value, which might me more familiar to a majority of the readers.\
\
\
## Suggestion\
\
Based on conceptual and technical aspects, reject with minor revisions. Based on scope and innovation, the manuscript may fall short of providing enough novel insight; in particular, the claim of providing novel insight into the evolution of genomic islands of divergence does not seem that sensational given previous work. The major contributions are neat study of the dependence of genetic and plastic determination of phenotypes as a function of genetic architecture, and a simulation experiment showing how recombination is expected to evolve in response to the genes vs. plasticity trade-off.\
\
\
## Major points\
\
**1.** The motivation of the present study is formulated in terms of the concept of *genetic conflict* between genome elements that differ in *evolutionary interest*. Here, this genetic conflict arises as a consequence of spatially heterogeneous fitness effects of different alleles and genes in two or more populations that inhabit different environments and exchange migrants. While the term *evolutionary interest* of a genomic element is common in the evolutionary-conflict jargon, it is uncommon in the classical population-genetic literature of local adaptation, where individual fitness is the key quantity that is optimised by evolution. It would therefore be useful if the authors could be more explicit about how the evolutionary interest of a genomic element in their sense (*the long-term success of a gene in the sense of representation in future generations*, *reproductive value*) relates to direct individual fitness (the performance of an individual where it *currently*\
is).\
\
**2.** The population-genetic literature on multilocus models of divergent selection and gene flow has a long tradition and is quite evolved, but it is shallowly represented in the Introduction and Discussion. It would help to be more clear about how the current work connects to previous work, and so be more specific about what is really novel in the former. The importance of recombination (a primary aspect of genetic architecture) for the establishment and maintenance of locally adaptive polymorphisms in the presence of gene flow has been studied exhaustively in previous analytical and simulation studies (for references, see e.g. B\'fcrger & Akerman 2011, Yeaman & Whitlock 2011, Akerman & B\'fcrger 2014, Aeschbacher & B\'fcrger 2014, Yeaman et al. 2016). These studies have identified critical migration and recombination rates below which establishment, maintenance, and clustering of adaptive among-habitat polymorphisms are to be expected. One of the open questions would then be to\
ask how the presence of generalist plasticity genes (linked or unlinked) affects these properties (establishment, maintenance, clustering) of differentially adapted ecological polymorphisms. But this is exactly what the present study does not do (the evolution of genomic islands is simulated without plasticity genes), and so I think the claim that this study provides novel insight into the evolution of genomic islands is too ambitious.\
\
**3.** Related to the previous point, there is currently a confusion about the primary contribution of the manuscript. The authors seem to be primarily interested in the effect of genetic architecture (essentially recombination rate) on the relative importance of genetics vs. plasticity. My impression is that this is indeed the main point of the paper. The authors also claim to provide novel insight into the evolution of **genomic islands of divergence**. Yet, the simulations investigating the evolution of these islands for a fixed recombination map ignore the effect of plasticity. Indeed, the results of these simulations do not seem to convey any new insight compared to the existing literature (see e.g. the simulation studies by Feder, Nosil, Flaxman and coauthors), and so are more of a confirming than ground-breaking nature.\
\
The authors do, however, go beyond previous work by explicitly simulating the evolution of recombination between ecological polymorphisms, and between the latter and modifiers of the reaction norm. This is indeed novel and of great interest. It would seem appropriate to state that previous theoretical work (which, notably, ignored plasticity) has predicted that the recombination rate among ecological polymorphisms should evolve (e.g. Aeschbacher & B\'fcrger 2014). In principle, the evolution of lower recombination rates between ecological polymorphisms in the presence of gene flow could be classified as a mechanism leading to genomic islands of divergence. The existing literature on the evolution of genomic islands takes the recombination landscape as static (yet not necessarily constant along the genome), and is more concerned with the dynamics of establishment and maintenance of ecological polymorphisms (e.g. B\'fcrger & Akerman 2011, Aeschbacher & B\'fcrger 2014, Ackermann &\
B\'fcrger 2014) and the evolution of other aspects of the genetic architecture than recombination (e.g. the stacking of small mutations, Yeaman & Whitlock 2011). While there does not seem to be a firm conceptual barrier to breaking with this paradigm, I do think that it matters on what time scales we can expect the recombination rate to evolve, relative to the time scale of mutation and selection on ecological polymorphisms. I feel it would be beyond the scope of the current manuscript to require a thorough investigation of this point. However, I suggest that the authors discuss it to some greater extent.\
\
**4.** I think it is a fundamental shortcoming of the present study that the dynamics at the loci harbouring the divergently selected ecological polymorphisms are not studied. First, I think showing how the allele frequencies change at the $z$ loci would help much to understand the evolution of the reaction norm. Second, I think that the evolution of the reaction norm itself must alter the allele-frequency dynamics at the $z$ loci, at least over a transient period. Specifically, with more plasticity (e.g. a steeper slope), I would expect there to be much less divergence in allele frequencies at the $z$ loci, and ultimately a loss of one of the two alleles by genetic drift. If genes for local adaptation ($z$ genes) are unlinked to the plasticity genes, do you observe weaker or stronger allele-frequency differences in the two habitats at the $z$ loci compared to the case of tightly linkage between local-adaptation and plasticity genes? The remark in l. 204-205 in the\
description of the simulation model (Methods) points in the direction of a mutual interaction between the $z$ and the $\\alpha$ and $\\beta$ genes. \
\
**5.** I was unhappy with the term *statistical information* used to describe what I think is essentially *linkage disequilibrium*. Although *linkage disequilibrium* per se is also an unfortunate term, it is at least historically established in the literature. I acknowledge that sharing of statistical information or similar expressions have been used in the literature, but I would suggest to only use it here if it differs from (gametic) linkage disequilibrium, i.e. from correlations among allele-frequencies arising from gene flow and selection. The current formulation seems unnecessarily fancy, unless I am missing a point here.\
\
\
## Minor points\
\
I use the following code of abbreviations to classify my points:\
\
Q: question\
C: comment\
S: suggested change\
R: requested change\
\
\
### Abstract\
\
- C: The first sentence mentions genetic conflict due to transmission patterns as a mechanism. However, it appears to me that the manuscript is not so much concerned about transmission patterns in a narrow sense, but more about a conflict arising from where different genomic elements will be in the future (**destination conflict** *sensu* Gardner & \'dabeda 2017).\
- C: The claim that the manuscript sheds light on the evolution of genomic islands of divergence seems unjustified (see major points 3 & 4 above).\
\
\
### Introduction\
\
- [l. 13-15; 18-19] S: Please explain how *pathways of transmission to future generations* and *long-term reproductive success of a gene* relate to fitness. Q: Could the conceptual framework used here also be formulated in terms of fitness, rather than evolutionary interest?\
- [l. 34] S: State which sub-category of genetic conflict *ecological genetic conflict* would fall into *sensu* Gardner & \'dabeda (2017), i.e. *origin conflict*, *situation conflict*, or *destination conflict*, and say why.\
- [l. 47-54] C: I found the use of the term *gene* here somewhat problematic, as you are apparently referring to a *genomic element* *sensu* Gardner & \'dabeda (2017). Why not state this definition first?\
- [l. 55-57] C: I was struggling with this paragraph, as I would think that genomic islands form among 'genes' with a shared evolutionary interest, and not because of a differences in evolutionary interest.\
- [l. 72-74] C: The interaction of genes in an island of divergence and unlinked genes has been studied before. See e.g. Aeschbacher & B\'fcrger (2014) and Yeaman et al. (2016). However, I do think that how reaction norm slopes of plasticity genes evolve under different linkage regimes has not been studied, and here is where I see the scope of this manuscript.\
- [l. 112] S: "between habitat genetic polymorphism" -> "between-habitat genetic polymorphism"\
\
\
### Methods\
\
- [l. 158] C: I found the formulation '...the probability for a dispersing individual to change habitat is $m/2$' unfortunate. Isn't it that, conditional on an individual dispersing, its chance of changing the environment (habitat) is $1/2$, not $m/2$? The *unconditional* probability of changing habitat would seem to be $m/2$.\
- [l. 172] S: "...that there are two 'fixed' alleles, $\\zeta_1$ and $\\zeta_2$,..." -> "...that there are only two alleles with fixed values $\\zeta_1$ and $\\zeta_2$,..."\
- [l. 189] C: It was not entirely clear to me what you mean by 'nearly monomorphic' here.\
- [l. 190-200] S: It may be worth stating that the mutational processes at loci $z_1$ and $z_2$ are independent.\
- [l. 196] C: The order of the loci will certainly have a quantitative, but perhaps also a qualitative influence. Perhaps say why you consider only this single order.\
\
\
### Results\
\
- [l. 236-241] R: As stated above (major point 4), I think the allele-frequency dynamics at the $z$ loci are too important for a complete understanding of the model to be ignored.\
- [l. 241] R: "...there is single reaction norm..." -> "...there is a single reaction norm..."; "...with steeper slope..." -> "...with a steeper slope..."\
- [l. 258-261] C: It would seem that ignoring plasticity here leads to a potentially strong underestimation of the effective migration rate. This seems worth stating more explicitly.\
- [l. 270] R: "...of then analysis..." -> "...of the analysis..."\
- [l. 276] R: "...for migration rate..." -> "...for a migration rate..."; Q: Have you tried obtaining an analytical approximation to the critical migration rate? It would be interesting to see how your critical value compares to the one derived by B\'fcrger and Akerman (2011).\
- [l. 276-282] C: I think this paragraph is a good example of how important it would be to investigate the allele-frequency dynamics at the $z$ loci in order to fully understand the observed patterns.\
- [l. 283-290] C: As mentioned above (major point 3), since plasticity is prevented from evolving, I find it hard to see what is novel about these simulations compared to previous work (e.g. by Yeaman & Whitlock 2011).\
- [l. 304-308] C/Q: I very much liked the fact that you explore the evolution of recombination rates, as I think this is indeed novel in this specific context. However, have you explored different starting conditions for the $\\rho$ parameters? And is there only one or are there several (locally stable) equilibria?\
- [l. 309-315] C: I was not entirely convinced by the conclusion that the recombination rates $\\rho_\{z \\alhpa\}$ and $\\rho_\{\\alpha \\beta\}$ did not evolve towards smaller values. The mean $\\rho_\{z \\alpha\}$ evolved under an intermediate level of migration ($m = 0.18$) reported in Table 1 differs considerably from the ones evolved under low ($m = 0.12$) and high ($m = 0.24$) migration. The problem seems to be - at least partially - that the simulated distributions of these two evolved recombination rates is bimodal, and so the mean may not be the best summary statistic to report. More fundamentally, however, I was wondering if the bimodality of these two distributions has a biological meaning in terms of reflecting a bistability situation. Moreover, what was the observed correlation between $\\rho_\{z \\alhpa\}$ and $\\rho_\{\\alpha \\beta\}$ over the course of the simulations? Is there any pattern as, for instance, a low $\\rho_\{z \\alhpa\}$ whenever $\\rho_\{\\alpha \\beta\}$ is high and vice\
versa? Such a dynamics would necessitate a more differentiated interpretation of the results than the one currently given. I am tempted to insist on a more thorough investigation of this point, as from Fig. 5 it appears that the critical migration rate above which no polymorphism is maintained at the two $z$ loci might be between $m = 0.12$ and $m = 0.18$.\
\
\
###\'a0Discussion\
\
- [l. 321-323] C: As mentioned above, the claim that we gain more insight from this study about the evolution of genomic islands in the presence of plasticity seems to be an overstatement, given that in the relevant simulations plasticity does not evolve.\
- [l. 340] R: The appropriate reference instead of Aeschbacher et al. (2017) would appear to be Aeschbacher & B\'fcrger (2014). Yeaman & Whitlock (2011) do not seem to derive a new approximation to the effective migration rate.\
- [l. 338-346] C: I stumbled over the statement that reproductive values are (perhaps) more informative than effective migration rates. An effective migration rate can be defined in various ways, e.g. as the speed of approach to an internal (polymorphic) allele-frequency equilibrium (e.g. B\'fcrger & Akerman 2011, and adopted e.g. by Yeaman 2015), as the migration rate that would lead to the same stationary allele-frequency distribution under a neutral migration-drift model (Petry 1983), or as the proportion of the future population made up by descendants of immigrants (Charlesworth et al. 1997). All of these derivations converge to the same approximation under the assumption of weak evolutionary forces. Since the quantity derived by Charlesworth et al. (1997) is reminiscent of a reproductive value of immigrant alleles, it may seem worth being more explicit about what exact approximation of the effective migration rate was used here, and how it might be giving different results\
than the reproductive value.\
- [l. 350-351; 362-365] C: As mentioned above (major point 5), the term 'statistical information' sounds a bit magic; I suspect what you refer to is probably simply linkage disequilibrium.\
- [l. 362] "...qualitative similar..." -> "...qualitatively similar..."\
- [l. 367-371] R: Surely, *recombination* must be added to the mix of driving evolutionary forces here, besides migration and divergent selection.\
- [l. 369] S: The correct reference would again seem to be Aeschbacher & B\'fcrger (2014)\
- [l. 374-375] S: Some more references to empirical studies would seem appropriate.\
- [l. 376-378] R: Delete commas after "main result" in l. 376 and after "(Figs. 2, 3, 5, 6, S1)" in l. 377. Add comma after "is new".\
- [l. 402-404] C: As mentioned above, the connection between the main focus of the paper and the evolution of genomic islands of divergence appears to bold here.\
\
\
### Tables and Figures\
\
- [Table 1] S: In the caption, perhaps use a different notation for the polymorphic complex existing of $z_1$ and $z_2$. The current one ($z_1$ - $z_2$) reads like a subtraction. \
- [Figures 2 and 5] R: I would like to see the equilibrium frequencies of the alleles at the $z$ loci plotted along the results shown. At least, it should be visible at which point the polymorphism at the $z$ loci is lost. Moreover, I was wondering why the intercept ($\\alpha$) and slope ($\\beta$) continue to evolve at a reduced rate after the kinks in the respective curves, as a function of the migration rate. Please add a short clarification/explanation. In the caption of Fig. 5, line 8: "replicate" -> "replicates". Q: For the scenario of 'full' linkage, the recombination rates were set to 0.001, so strictly speaking this is not full linkage. If you were to set these rates to 0, would the outcome depend on the initial conditions (i.e. the initial haplotypes present)?\
- [Figures 3 and 6]: R: Please label the x axis. C: I found the use of *generalist* and *specialist* as done here in these captions somewhat problematic, since a genetic generalist (homozygote for one or the other allele at each of the $z$ loci) can be (or evolve into) a plastic generalist.\
- [Figure 7] R: As mentioned earlier, the bimodal distribution of evolved recombination rates requests a more illuminating explanation. Also, given the values in Table 1, it would be interesting to see the distributions of the recombination rates for $m = 0.18$ in Fig. 7 as well. \
\
\
### Appendix A\
\
#### Numerical analyses\
\
- [p. 28, Eq. A4] S: I think it would be better to explicitly add both the terms $P_\{i12\}$ and $P_\{i21\}$, and multiply these heterozygote genotype frequencies by 1/2, rather than saying that the equivalence has been taken into account.\
- [p. 29, last two lines] S: For clarity, I suggest using a different notation for $p_\{ik\}$ and its equilibrium (e.g. adding a hat to the latter).\
\
#### Mutant invasion\
\
- [p. 30, l. 1-4] R: It was not clear to me what you assume about the recombination rates $\\rho_\{z \\alpha\}$ and $\\rho_\{\\alpha \\beta\}$ in these invasion analyses. Please (re-)state explicitly. Similarly, it is therefore also not entirely clear whether a given modifier only either modifies one of the alleles (the linked one) at the $z$ locus or one of the plasticity genes ($\\alpha$, $\\beta$). Or whether a given modifier can simultaneously affect one of the alleles at the $z$ locus as well as $\\alpha$ and/or $\\beta$. Please clarify.\
- [p. 30, last four lines] R: The sentence about recombination seems to be broken; at least I did not understand what exactly you wanted to say. Please fix.\
- S: It would help to state explicitly that you assume that the resident populations (and hence the mean fitnesses) are assumed not to be affected by the invasion of the modifier.\
\
#### Invasion fitness\
\
- [p. 31, last paragraph] C: Did you artificially retain the polymorphism at the $z$ locus? If so, I wonder how biologically meaningful the results are. If the polymorphism were lost if you did not retain it, surely you would observe different invasion dynamics for the modifier, and potentially also at the plasticity genes.\
\
### Supporting tables and figures\
\
- [Table A1] R: In the second part of the caption, "...with linkage $\\rho$ the the..." -> "...with recombination rate $\\rho$ to the...".\
- [Fig. A1] S: As for Figs. 2 & 5, it would be helpful if the equilibrium allele-frequencies at the $z$ locus were shown, as well. In the caption (second-to-last line): "...$\\rho$ between between the genetic..." -> "...$\\rho$ between the genetic...".\
- [Fig. A2] In the caption: R: "...described main text..." -> "...described in the main text..."; "...we extend to the..." -> "...we extent this to the...". C: In the simulations, a recombination rate of $\\rho = 0.002$ seems very low compared to the migration rate $m = 0.06$. Therefore, the evolution of genomic islands is not too surprising. It would be interesting to know at what recombination rate the evolution of genomic islands breaks down, and how this threshold relates to critical recombination rates reported e.g. in Aeschbacher & B\'fcrger (2014).\
\
[signed]\
Simon Aeschbacher\
\
\
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx\
General Instructions\
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx\
\
Upload your response to this decision letter as file type RESPONSE TO REVIEWERS\
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx\
Please submit your revision file with comments and track changes turned off. \
If you wish to ALSO include a track changes version, attach it as file type "Other."\
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx\
Please check over your supplementary material and consider how they fit into Am Nat style. \
\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a01. Are parts of it essential for understanding or reproducing the results? Please refer to them as appendix material. These incur page charges because they are edited and typeset and preserved even if they appear online only ($65 per every 6 manuscript pages). Tables of variables and literature cited will be moved to the print version (main PDF) as will very short appendixes.\
\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a02. Are parts informative but less essential? Those can be designated as author-supplied PDF. Figures and tables have "S" labels. There are no charges.\
\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a0\'a03. Data go to Dryad.\
See http://comments.amnat.org/2017/06/online-only-material-in-am-nat.html for more details.\
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx\
Tables in Am Nat follow the Chicago Manual of Style:\
http://www.journals.uchicago.edu/journals/an/prep-table\
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx\
\
FIGURES CHECKLIST:\
\
1. Are all axes labeled?\
2. Do all axis labels have units?\
3. If there are multiple lines/dots, is each a different line style and color?\
4. Are all lines sufficiently thick (if you used matlab, and they are the default thickness, the answer is no)?\
5. Are all font sizes legible (i.e., about the same size as the fonts in the rest of the document/slide/poster)?\
6. If there are multiple lines, is there a legend or other textual description of each line?\
7. Are your axes 'tight' (that is, are the bounds of the axes just larger than the max and min of what you want to show)? If not, do you have a good reason for the excess?\
8. Are all graphics that can be vector graphics actually vector graphics? (i.e., never use a bitmap if avoidable)\
9. Do all axes have either clear tick marks or gridlines indicating magnitudes of everything?\
10. Are all the letters/numbers fully visible (i.e., not obscured by part of the figure)?\
11. Is the aspect ratio correct? (Hint: if you rescaled both the width and height, it is not.)\
12. Is there any use of Helvetica? (Helvetica can cause font substitution problems in the production systems)\
13. Production quality figures are vectored or high resolution (1200 dpi).\
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx\
The American Naturalist now has secondary, non-English abstracts in the languages of the location where research was done. There will be an opportunity to paste in an abstract when you return your revision.\
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx\
}