---
title: Review of Manuscript EVL3-23-0082 by Cruzan – "Testing Wright's Intermediate Population Size Hypothesis – When Genetic Drift is a Good Thing"
date: 28 August 2023
geometry: "left=4cm,right=4cm,top=3cm,bottom=3cm"
output: pdf_document
linestretch: 1.15
...

## Summary and recommendation
In this manuscript, Cruzan aims to find a mechanistic explanation for empirical evidence of rapid (adaptive) evolution after population bottlenecks and founder events. The author sets out to test if genetic drift can "facilitate" selection in "small" populations by means of simulation and comparison of these to existing theoretical predictions based on the diffusion approximation. Cruzan claims to find evidence for "drift facilitation" in terms of increased changes in the frequency of weakly beneficial, initially rare, alleles in small (here: $N < 100$) populations. He further interprets quantitative differences between simulated fixation times and those predicted by the diffusion approximation as qualitative evidence that genetic drift accelerates (decelerates) adaptive evolution in small (large) populations. This interpretation implies that the diffusion approximation fails to capture the interaction between genetic drift and selection beyond quantitative approximation errors. Cruzan also simulates what he calls "fixation flux" – or what is more commonly known as the rate of substitution – of beneficial mutations to apparently find that this rate declines with increasing population size. Even though the authors seems to acknowledge that this finding is affected by too short a simulation time, he concludes that the substitution rate of beneficial mutations is lower in large than small populations – and thus that large populations are more prone to accumulating segregation load compared to smaller ones. Cruzan's dissection of genetic load into drift load and segregation load as a function of population size is an interesting one, but the conclusion that differences in these types of load between small and large populations explain rapid adaptation following population bottlenecks remains little more than a speculation given the narrow scope of the simulations performed.

I am afraid that the manuscript is unclear with respect to fundamental points, including what exactly is to be understood by "small" (and "intermediate") population size, what exactly is meant by "drift facilitation" and how it should be measured properly, and why the author is challenging the diffusion approximation when the analyses he performs are – by their design – not capable of proofing its qualitative "wrongness".

The effects on simulation outcomes of implementation choices such as the distribution of selection coefficients or the way in which an individual's fitness arises from fitness functions at individual loci on simulations remain unclear. It is therefore impossible to judge at this stage if the results were confounded by these choices.

I have read the reviews of three previous reviewers as well as the author's response to these reviews. Reviewer 1 raised substantial concerns based on their expert background in theoretical results by Wright, Haldane, Kimura and Ohta relevant to the scope of the manuscript. I share these concerns, I think they are substantial. I am not going to repeat them, even though I do not think they have been satisfyingly attenuated by the author's response to them.

Overall, I think this manuscript suffers from too many conceptual issues and makes claims not backed by the analyses. Fixing this shortcoming would take substantial conceptual redesign, an extension in the scope of simulations, and a thorough comparison to theoretical results not yet integrated. I am afraid the only recommendation I can suggest is to reject the manuscript as it is.

## Major concerns

Even though written well overall, the manuscript suffers from a lack of clarity about fundamental points:

1. The author at times refers to "small" populations (e.g. l.45), "intermediate" populations (e.g. l.297), or "intermediate sizes (small)" populations (l.97) as the populations of interest. I acknowledge that some of this terminological inconsistency follows from what Wright, Simpson and the author himself deem to be the size range of interest. However, or even more so, it would seem important to clearly delineate which range of population sizes is of interest, and to then use clear terminology.
2. A related issue is that population size can be defined in absolute terms (no. of individuals $N$) or relative to the strength of evolutionary processes (e.g. relative to the selection coefficient [$1/(4s)$] or the mutation rate [$1/(4u)$]). An intricate problem here is that Wright, Kimura, Ohta, Ewens and others would tend to use the relative definition, acknowledging the fundamental result from the diffusion approximation that it is the compound parameters (e.g. $Ns$, $Nu$, ...) that determine the dynamics and equilibria of allele frequencies. The author, however, seems to be making the case that this 'diffusion view' fails to capture a fundamental and qualitative aspect of how drift ($1/N$) interacts with selection ($s$) beyond $Ns$. For that reason, the author is understandably bound to using the absolute definition, but this requires a "translation" to the relative definition at times when it comes to comparing his claims to the theoretical predictions based on the diffusion approximation. This issue leads to a confusion that hampers both reading flow and comprehension of the manuscript.
3. It remains unclear what exactly the author means by "drift facilitation". A concise definition for such a central term seems necessary.

More fundamentally, I struggled with conceptual problems relating to the aim of the manuscript, an apparent mismatch between the aim and the analyses performed, and a lack of substantiated evidence for some of the claims made. Specifically:

4. I am concerned that the overarching aim of the manuscript – to understand why rapid adaptation sometimes occurs after a founder event involving a bottleneck and/or a change in selective environment – cannot be properly addressed with the narrow scope of the simulations performed. Simulations of just a single population of constant size without bottleneck, change in selective environment, and no pre-history determining the amount and nature of standing genetic variation have little bearing on that biological scenario of interest. This is why I think the analyses do not cover well enough the domain of the objectives.
5. Even though the author states multiple times that his main aim is to understand rapid adaptive evolution after a founder event in a new environment, the manuscript also seems to be geared at more generally challenging the qualitative "correctness" of the diffusion approximation to the probability and time of fixation of beneficial and deleterious mutations, as well as downstream results on the substitution rate and the amount and nature of genetic load in finite populations. I agree that if the diffusion approximation failed to capture a qualitatively important effect of drift on selection, this would have implications on adaptive adaptation after founder events – and likely well beyond. However, there are many more factors that may cause rapid adaptive evolution after a founder event, including selection from standing variation, pre-adaptation, availability of a new ecological niche, whether selection is soft or hard, and the mere strength of selection itself. It is not immediately clear why the author selects the "drift facilitation" explanation and masks out the other factors.
6. Beyond the lack of clarity associated with the term "drift facilitation", there is the issue of how it should be measured. I would argue it should be measured relative to one of two extremes, namely i) neutrality in a finite population or ii) adaptation in an infinitely large population. Results are currently shown on scales that makes their interpretation difficult: absolute $\Delta q$, absolute difference between fixation times, means over distributions of selection coefficients, as well as a substitution rate affected by limited simulation time. Moreover, if the aim really were to challenge the diffusion approximation, this would require much more extensive simulations capturing a wide combination of values of $s$ and $N$ over a range of values of the compound parameter $Ns$, as well as a well-chosen metric or measure of accuracy. However, I wonder if this would be a promising strategy for a paper given the extensive amount of previous work investigating the accuracy of the diffusion approximation and the results coming out of this work (cf. comments by reviewer 1 in the first round of reviews).

## Minor comments

Given the weight of the concerns stated above and stated before by some of the other reviewers, I am not going to provide an extensive list of minor issues, and I am refraining completely from listing typos and comments on word choice and alike. Here is just a selection of the most important minor issues:

- Eq. on l.162: How can the reduction in population mean fitness be independent of the number of loci $F$? This may be the case under particular assumptions about the interaction of fitness across multiple loci, but since this relationship is not obvious, the author should derive the equation or provide a reference backing the equation.
- Related to the previous issue, it remains unclear which of the multi-locus fitness models implemented in SimuPOP were used in the simulations (additive, multiplicative, "heterogeneous"). This point is relevant because the details of how individual loci interact to determine individual fitness can have a strong impact on load.
- Eq. on l.170 for the population mean fitness under selfing is not derived nor backed by a reference. I was not able to derive it, but this may have to do with the fact that I did not know which multi-locus fitness model the author assumed.
- For reasons that remain unclear, the authors draws, in some of the simulations, the selection coefficient from a Poisson distribution with mean $\bar{s}$. What is the effect of integrating over this distribution (which is essentially what happens in the simulations)? The diffusion approximation is concerned with just a single locus; to match the simulation results, the diffusion approximation would need to be integrated over the distribution of $s$, too.
- The absolute difference between simulated fixation times and those predicted by the diffusion approximation (Fig. 4) may be a misleading measure of accuracy. I would be more concerned about the relative error, because absolute times to fixation can vary strongly as a function of $Ns$.