{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2759
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Oblique;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue0;\red9\green79\blue209;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0\cname textColor;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c0\c40784\c85490;
}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf2 From: Molecular Biology and Evolution <onbehalfof@manuscriptcentral.com>\
Subject: Invitation to review (MBE-23-1089)\
Date: 2 January 2024 at 15:11:32 CET\
To: simon.aeschbacher@ieu.uzh.ch\
Reply-To: mp132@nyu.edu\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec3 02-Jan-2024\
\
Manuscript Type: Discoveries\
Authors: Wei, Kai; Stam, Remco; Tellier, Aur\'e9lien; Silva Arias, Gustavo\
\
Dear Dr. Aeschbacher,\
\
A new manuscript entitled \'93Copy number variations shape genomic structural diversity underpinning ecological adaptation in the wild tomato 
\f2\i Solanum chilense
\f1\i0 \'94 is being considered by MBE.\'a0I would like to request you to review this manuscript, as we believe that your expertise will be useful to the authors and editors for improving the manuscript and determining its suitability for publication in MBE. \'a0\
\
The abstract is included below. \'a0We hope that you will be able to submit a review within two weeks, and we thank you in advance for considering this request.\'a0\
\
If you find that you cannot accept the invitation, we welcome your recommendations for alternative reviewers.\'a0\
\
Please note that by agreeing to review, you are agreeing to the possibility of transfer of your reviewer details/comments to Molecular Biology and Evolution's existing cascade. Molecular Biology and Evolution may also opt to transfer rejected manuscripts to other related OUP journals using the OUP Transfer Desk, along with anonymised referees\'92 comments. If you object to this, please let us know.\
\
*** PLEASE NOTE: This is a two-step process. After clicking on the link, you will be directed to a webpage to confirm. *** \
\
Agreed: {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/mbe?URL_MASK=f21e4d92fe4949e8aa14f27fd18ea865"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 https://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/mbe?URL_MASK=f21e4d92fe4949e8aa14f27fd18ea865}}\
\
Declined: {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/mbe?URL_MASK=a19c5d5925bd46819936cc1bbcf18777"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 https://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/mbe?URL_MASK=a19c5d5925bd46819936cc1bbcf18777}}\
\
Yours sincerely,\
\
Michael Purugganan\
MBE Board of Editors\
mp132@nyu.edu\
\
Abstract of the manuscript:\
Copy Number Variations (CNVs) are genomic structural changes constituting genetic diversity and underpinning rapid ecological adaptation. The timing of, and the target genes involved in adaptation through CNVs in the tomato and wild relative lineage still need to be explored at the population level. Therefore, we characterise the CNV landscape of 
\f2\i Solanum chilense
\f1\i0 , a wild tomato species, using whole-genome data of 35 individuals from seven populations distributed in contrasting environments. We identify 212,207 CNVs, including 160,926 deletions and 51,281 duplications. We find CNVs for intergenic and coding regions and a higher number of CNVs in diverging populations occupying stressful habitats. CNV and single nucleotide polymorphism analyses concordantly reveal the known species\'92 population structure, underscoring the impact of historical demographic and recent colonisation events on the distribution of CNVs. Furthermore, we identify 3,539 candidate genes with highly divergent CNV profiles across populations. Interestingly, these genes are functionally associated with response to abiotic stimuli and stress and linked to multiple pathways of flowering time regulation. Gene CNV exhibits two evolutionary trends: a contraction with gene loss in central and southern coast populations and an expansion with gene gain in the southern highland group. Environmental association of the CNVs ultimately links the dynamics of gene copy number to six climatic variables. It suggests that natural selection has likely shaped CNV patterns in response to the climatic changes during the recent range expansion of 
\f2\i S. chilense
\f1\i0 . Our findings provide insights into the role of CNVs underlying adaptation in marginal populations. }