{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1343\cocoasubrtf160
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf2 Date: 2 January 2015 07:34:01 CET\
From: jen@molecol.com\
To: jen@molecol.com\
Subject: Decision for MER-14-0489, Molecular Ecology Resources\
\
02-Jan-2015\
\
Dear Reviewer,\
\
A decision of 'Reject, encourage to resubmit' has been rendered for 'A new FST-based method to uncover local adaptation using environmental variables.', which you recently reviewed for Molecular Ecology Resources. \'a0The comments of all reviewers and the decision letter are included at the bottom of this email.\
\
Your participation in the peer-review process is critical to the journal's success and directly impacts the quality of the research we publish. \'a0We appreciate your assistance with the evaluation of the manuscript and hope that we may contact you for assistance with future submissions falling within your areas of interest and expertise.\
\
All the best,\
\
Dr. Jennifer Gow\
Managing Editor, Molecular Ecology Resources\
jen@molecol.com\
\
\
Decision letter in full:\
02-Jan-2015\
\
Dear Mr. de Villemereuil:\
\
Your manuscript entitled 'A new FST-based method to uncover local adaptation using environmental variables.' has now been reviewed and assessed by an Editor. Their comments are included below. Unfortunately, this manuscript cannot be accepted at the present time. However, I encourage you to consider reworking your paper and resubmitting it at a later date.\
\
If you do choose to resubmit this manuscript in the future, please use our online submission system. After logging into your author portal, select 'Manuscripts with decisions', then create a resubmission of 'A new FST-based method to uncover local adaptation using environmental variables.'. We have a standard resubmission deadline of one year, which can be extended within reason. Please do not upload your resubmission as a new manuscript.\
\
Please note that it is Molecular Ecology Resources policy to allow only one reject/encourage decision per manuscript. Resubmitted papers must therefore be improved to the point of acceptability or they will be rejected outright.\
\
IMPORTANT: Your original files will be available to you when you upload your revised manuscript. Please delete any outdated files before completing the submission.\
\
Thank you for submitting your research to Molecular Ecology Resources, and I hope that you will resubmit your manuscript in the near future.\
\
All the best,\
\
Dr. Jennifer Gow\
Managing Editor, Molecular Ecology Resources\
6270 University Blvd\
Vancouver, BC\
V6T 1Z4\
Canada\
E-mail: jen@molecol.com\
\
Editor Comments to Author:\
\
This paper extends the previous F-model of Foll & Gaggiotti to allow for the influence of an observed environmental variable. \'a0One reviewer is generally positive, but the other gives a detailed and critical report. \'a0I largely agree with their criticisms, and so must reject the paper. \'a0A resubmission might be possible, but would require a substantial amount of work. \'a0The authors are proposing a method that might be widely used, and so it needs a much more serious validation than is given here. \'a0More fundamentally, I am not at all convinced that it is sensible to model the effect of environment on Fst rather than on the allele frequencies themselves. \'a0\
\
Two models are used: one assigning a locus specific effect on differentiation (measured by log(F/(1-F))), and the other an effect which is the product of a locus-specific effect and the environmental variable. \'a0The latter represents an effect where some loci are more differentiated in (say) a hotter environment, and others less differentiated. \'a0This is rather mysterious if one imagines a direct environmental selection on particular alleles - in a symmetric situation, populations would be equally differentiated in opposite environments, but in opposite directions. \'a0One might imagine a justification for this approach, on the grounds that we observe markers not causal variants, but then, LD between markers and causal variants would need to be independent across populations - which seems unlikely.\
\
Another issue is that the approach ignores geographic structure, which must reduce the effective number of independent populations, and so reduce power, \'a0The comparison of different structures only addresses this problem in a very limited way. \'a0It is a serious problem, because the effects of an environmental variable can only be distinguished from local effects (or effects of some unobserved environmental variable) \'a0with a large number of independent populations. \'a0The simulations of 16 populations seem too small for the approach to be robust, especially when there are correlations between them. \
\
Overall, the proposed method needs much more substantial validation - not simply by running more simulations, and by including the full model (see rev 1), but by testing specifically how factors such as correlations amongst populations, marker vs causal allele LD, numbers of alleles per locus, etc influence the method. \'a0There also needs to be a clear explanation of why this approach should be used, rather than a direct regression of allele frequency on environmental factor.\
\
Sincerely, \
\
Prof. Nick Barton\
Subject Editor, Molecular Ecology Resources\
\
Reviewer Comments to Author:\
Reviewer: 1\
\
Recommendation: Reject, encourage resubmission\
\
Comments:\
Please find detailed comments in a separate PDF file.\
\
Additional Questions:\
Quality of Science: Mostly competent, but suffering from flaws of a technical or methodological nature\
\
Importance of Science: Methods or DNA resources only of use to the authors or others in their group; method represents only slight modification of existing techniques\
\
Quality of Presentation: Ideas and methods mostly clear, but grammar and/or spelling is poor, format does not follow guidelines, and /or there is redundancy between sections\
\
Does this manuscript require significant reduction in length? If 'Yes", please indicate where shortening is required in your specific comments: Yes\
\
Does the Data Accessibility section list all the datasets needed to recreate the results in the manuscript? If \'91No\'92, please specify which additional data are needed in your comments to the authors.: Yes\
\
\
\
\
Reviewer: 2\
\
Recommendation: Accept, minor revisions\
\
Comments:\
\
De Villemereuil and Gaggiotti introduce a method that extends previous methods based on population differentiation to incorporate information about environmental variation. This novel method bridges the gap between agnostic FST-type approaches and environmental correlation approaches. In addition, the approach allows for heterogeneity in selection and other factors not related to local adaptation (background selection, variation in mutation rates, incompatibilities).\
The approach presented here advances previous work by building on a robust statistical foundation previously introduced to test for correlations with environmental variation. This is a valuable contribution to the pool of existing methods. \
\
Specific comments:\
The authors identify a set of candidate loci from data from human populations (from Asia) and salmon. For the human analyses, they identify enriched gene sets based on these loci and compare the signals to signals from a previous analysis. It was not clear to me why they focused exclusively on Asian populations and not the complete set of populations in the HGDP. Perhaps this had to do with the overall variation in environment for different population subsets?\
\
There were several grammatical problems, especially early in the manuscripts. Most of these were subject-verb disagreements that could easily be fixed with a careful read-through. Some are listed below:\
\
Line	comment\
20	evolves <- evolve\
32	outliers <- outlier\
39	aims <- aim\
47	model <- models\
59	incorporates <- incorporate\
102	assumes <- assume\
207	marker was <- markers were\
313:	candidate <- candidates\
It would be useful to see how this method compares to existing methods such as LFMM and Bayenv. \
\
\
Additional Questions:\
Quality of Science: Technically and/or theoretically excellent method or resource, no fatal flaws\
\
Importance of Science: Research fills a significant gap in the genetic or methodological resources available to the molecular ecology community\
\
Quality of Presentation: Writing is clear, methods and analyses are transparent, ideas make sense, proper grammar and spelling is employed, redundancy is avoided\
\
Does this manuscript require significant reduction in length? If 'Yes", please indicate where shortening is required in your specific comments: No\
\
Does the Data Accessibility section list all the datasets needed to recreate the results in the manuscript? If \'91No\'92, please specify which additional data are needed in your comments to the authors.: Yes}