# Monthly Journal Review March 2024

Date: 4 March 2024
Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- PLoS Genetics (PLoS Genet)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
- [Will variants of uncertain significance still exist in 2030?](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.11.005)  
  variants of ucertain significance, precison genomic medicine, clinical genomics  
  

## Genetics
- [Pervasive G × E interactions shape adaptive trajectories and the exploration of the phenotypic space in artificial selection experiments](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyad186)  
  adaptive dynamics; association mapping; common gardens; epistasis; experimental evolution; genetic load; maize; pleiotropy  
 &#x261E; *Pick*  

- [Crossover shortage in potato is caused by StMSH4 mutant alleles and leads to either highly uniform unreduced pollen or sterility](https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyad194)  
  StMSH4; Plant Genetics and Genomics; crossover shortage; fertility; meiosis; potato breeding; unreduced gametes  


## PLoS Biol
- [Harnessing online digital data in biodiversity monitoring](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3002497)  
  biodiversity monitoring, online digital data  
  

- [The principle of uncertainty in biology: Will machine learning/artificial intelligence lead to the end of mechanistic studies?](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3002495)  
  molecular biology, principles, applications, machine learning, artificial intelligence  
 &#x261E; *Pick*  

- [Unveiling recent and ongoing adaptive selection in human populations](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3002469)  
  natural selection, human populations, human evolution, methodological innovation, recent timescales, genotype-phenotype-fitness map, essay  
 &#x261E; *Pick*  

- [Increased sugar valuation contributes to the evolutionary shift in egg-laying behavior of the fruit pest Drosophila suzukii](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3002432)  
  Drosophila suzukii, egg-laying behaviour, evolution, oviposition niche, chemosensorics, sugar valuation  
  

- [Recording animal-view videos of the natural world using a novel camera system and software package](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3002444)  
  animal view, camera system  

## PLoS Genet
- [Gametic selection favours polyandry and selfing](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1010660)  
  gemetic selection, mating system, monandry, polyandry, self-fertilisation, mutation load, inbreeding depression  
 &#x261E; *Pick*  

- [The era of the ARG: An introduction to ancestral recombination graphs and their significance in empirical evolutionary genomics](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1011110)  
  ARG, ancestral recombination graph, review, empirical evolutionary genomics  
  

- [Genetic drift promotes and recombination hinders speciation on holey fitness landscapes](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1011126)  
  Dobzhansky--Muller incompatibilities, speciation, holey fitness landscapes, recombination, mutation, population size  
 &#x261E; *Pick*  
  

## PNAS
- [The contribution of gene flow, selection, and genetic drift to five thousand years of human allele frequency change](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2312377121)  
  ancient DNA; gene flow; human evolution; linked selection; time series  
 &#x261E; *Pick*  

- [Functional constraints on the number and shape of flight feathers](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2306639121)  
  crown birds; feathered dinosaurs; flight; morphology; pennaraptora  
  
 Lukas
- [The 10,000-year biocultural history of fallow deer and its implications for conservation policy](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2310051121)  
  biomolecules; extinctions; fallow deer; translocations; zooarchaeology  
 &#x261E; *Pick*  
 Alice, Daniela, Lukas
- [High life satisfaction reported among small-scale societies with low incomes](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2311703121)  
  Indigenous Peoples; happiness; monetary income; subjective well-being; wealth  
  

- [Null mutants of a tomato Rho of plants exhibit enhanced water use efficiency without a penalty to yield](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2309006120)  
  RBOH; ROP; ROS; stomata; water use efficiency  
  

- [A dynamical limit to evolutionary adaptation](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2312845121)  
  Muller’s ratchet; evolutionary attractor; fitness-mediated epistasis; rapid evolution  
 &#x261E; *Pick*  

- [Phenotypic plasticity: A missing element in the theory of vegetation pattern formation](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2311528120)  
  fairy circles; multi-scale patterns; resilience; scale-dependent feedback; vegetation patterns  
  

- [Male androphilia, fraternal birth order, and female fecundity in Samoa: A 10-y retrospective](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2313284120)  
  balancing selection; cross-cultural research; male androphilia; sexual orientation; sexually antagonistic selection  
  

- [Widespread evidence for elephant exploitation by Last Interglacial Neanderthals on the North European plain](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2309427120)  
  Last Interglacial; Neanderthals; evolution of cooperation; group size; megaherbivores  
  

## Theor Popul Biol
- Nothing this month


# Summary of Picks

## Desbiez-Piat et al. (2024) Genetics: Pervasive G × E interactions shape adaptive trajectories and the exploration of the phenotypic space in artificial selection experiments

Abstract:
Quantitative genetics models have shown that **long-term selection responses depend on initial variance and mutational influx**. **Understanding limits of selection requires quantifying the role of mutational variance**. However, **correlative responses to selection on nonfocal traits** can perturb the selection response on the focal trait; and generations are often confounded with selection environments so that genotype by environment (⁠⁠G x E) interactions are ignored. The **Saclay divergent selection experiments (DSEs) on maize flowering time** were used to track the fate of individual mutations combining genotyping data and phenotyping data from yearly measurements (DSEYM) and common garden experiments (DSECG) with four objectives: **(1) to quantify the relative contribution of standing and mutational variance to the selection response, (2) to estimate genotypic mutation effects, (3) to study the impact of  interactions in the selection response, and (4) to analyze how trait correlations modulate the exploration of the phenotypic space**. We validated experimentally the expected enrichment of fixed beneficial mutations with an average effect of  and  days to flowering, depending on the genetic background. **Fixation of unfavorable mutations reached up to 25% of incoming mutations, a genetic load possibly due to antagonistic pleiotropy**, whereby mutations fixed in the selection environment (DSEYM) turned to be unfavorable in the evaluation environment (DSECG). Global patterns of trait correlations were conserved across genetic backgrounds but exhibited temporal patterns. Traits weakly or uncorrelated with flowering time triggered stochastic exploration of the phenotypic space, owing to microenvironment-specific fixation of standing variants and pleiotropic mutational input.

## de Lorenzo (2024) PLoS Biology: The principle of uncertainty in biology: Will machine learning/artificial intelligence lead to the end of mechanistic studies?

Abstract: Molecular Biology has long tried to discover mechanisms, considering that unless we understand the principles, we cannot develop applications. Now machine learning and artificial intelligence enable direct leaps to application without understanding the principles. Will this herald a decline in mechanistic studies?

Box 1: A biological principle of uncertainty?
Mechanistic understanding from first principles anticipates solar eclipses and the successful test of the first prototype of an atomic bomb with 100% accuracy. This is hardly attainable in Biology if the phenomenon at stake has many components. On the other hand, ML-based Alpha Fold enables prediction of complex protein structures with an average accuracy of >80%. True, it is not 100% but it is good enough for moving ahead in most cases. If we accept that we cannot follow all variables of a system—in particular if they change through time and space—resorting to patterns and probabilities might enable us to nevertheless solve practical problems without knowing the underlying basis.

This raises a deeper question about how we study the composition and evolution of biological systems. As physicists gave up on describing the exact position of particles beyond a certain subatomic scale, biologists may also have to give up mechanistic understanding of live systems beyond a given level of complexity in favour of a probabilistic, experience-based approach. In specific scales, mechanistic comprehension—and thus complete predictability—could be inherently impossible. Thus, efforts in that direction are likely to be ultimately futile. Yet, we can still handle description and even understanding of biological systems in terms of chances, scores, and so on.

This should not lead us to disappointment, but rather should be celebrated, as it may open new conceptual frameworks for the understanding of biological phenomena as open-ended occurrences [6] that evolve through trial-and-error progressions, in a way not dissimilar to the processes that ML/AI tries to somehow capture.

## Gao (2024) PLoS Biology: Unveiling recent and ongoing adaptive selection in human populations

Abstract:
Genome-wide scans for signals of selection have become a routine part of the analysis of population genomic variation datasets and have resulted in compelling evidence of selection during recent human evolution. **This Essay spotlights methodological innovations that have enabled the detection of selection over very recent timescales, even in contemporary human populations**. By harnessing large-scale genomic and phenotypic datasets, these new methods use different strategies to uncover connections between genotype, phenotype, and fitness. This Essay outlines the rationale and key findings of each strategy, discusses challenges in interpretation, and describes opportunities to improve detection and understanding of ongoing selection in human populations.

Conclusions:
The expanding biobank datasets will be pivotal in addressing these questions. First, they offer an opportunity to directly identify individual or groups of variants associated with fitness components. [...] Second, the rich phenotype data, coupled with theoretical advancements, can potentially distinguish between traits directly or indirectly under selection. [...] Lastly, given the emerging evidence of sex differences in phenotypic and fitness effects of the same variant [4,82], along with varying prediction accuracy of PGSs across different contexts (e.g., age, sex, income level) [88], more context-dependent effects will likely be unmasked.

## Kalirad et al. (2024) PLoS Genetics: Genetic drift promotes and recombination hinders speciation on holey fitness landscapes

Abstract:
Dobzhansky and Muller proposed a general mechanism through which microevolution, the substitution of alleles within populations, can cause the evolution of reproductive isolation between populations and, therefore, macroevolution. As allopatric populations diverge, many combinations of alleles differing between them have not been tested by natural selection and may thus be incompatible. Such genetic incompatibilities often cause low fitness in hybrids between species. Furthermore, the number of incompatibilities grows with the genetic distance between diverging populations. However, what determines the rate and pattern of accumulation of incompatibilities remains unclear. We investigate this question by simulating evolution on holey fitness landscapes on which genetic incompatibilities can be identified unambiguously. **We find that genetic incompatibilities accumulate more slowly among genetically robust populations and identify two determinants of the accumulation rate: recombination rate and population size**. In large populations with abundant genetic variation, recombination selects for increased genetic robustness and, consequently, incompatibilities accumulate more slowly. In small populations, genetic drift interferes with this process and promotes the accumulation of genetic incompatibilities. Our results suggest a novel mechanism by which genetic drift promotes and recombination hinders speciation.

Author summary:
As geographically isolated populations evolve, genetic incompatibilities accumulate between them. Eventually, these incompatibilities may cause the populations to become different species. What determines how quickly species are formed in this way remains unclear. We investigate this question using computer simulations and find that genetic incompatibilities accumulate more slowly among populations with individuals that are robust to genetic perturbations. We identify two factors that influence the accumulation rate via their effects on genetic robustness: the size of the populations and how much recombination takes place in them. Small populations with rare recombination accumulate incompatibilities more quickly.

## Simon & Coop (2024) PNAS: The contribution of gene flow, selection, and genetic drift to five thousand years of human allele frequency change

Significance:
The relative contribution of random genetic drift and natural selection to the change in allele frequencies through time is a long-standing question in evolutionary biology. We show through theory and simulation how genomic time series— such as ancient DNA datasets—can be used to decompose the genome-wide contributions of selection, gene flow, and genetic drift to allele frequency change. We apply these methods to two time series from ancient Europeans and show that gene flow accounts for most allele frequency change over the last few thousand years, with genetic drift and not selection making up much of the rest of the contribution to genome-wide evolutionary change.

Abstract:
Genomic time series from experimental evolution studies and ancient DNA datasets offer us a chance to directly observe the interplay of various evolutionary forces. We show how the genome-wide variance in allele frequency change between two time points can be decomposed into the contributions of gene flow, genetic drift, and linked selection. In closed populations, the contribution of linked selection is identifiable because it creates covariances between time intervals, and genetic drift does not. However, repeated gene flow between populations can also produce directionality in allele frequency change, creating covariances. We show how to accurately separate the fraction of variance in allele frequency change due to admixture and linked selection in a population receiving gene flow. We use two human ancient DNA datasets, spanning around 5,000 y, as time transects to quantify the contributions to the genome-wide variance in allele frequency change. We find that a large fraction of genome-wide change is due to gene flow. In both cases, after correcting for known major gene flow events, we do not observe a signal of genome-wide linked selection. Thus despite the known role of selection in shaping long-term polymorphism levels, and an increasing number of examples of strong selection on single loci and polygenic scores from ancient DNA, it appears to be gene flow and drift, and not selection, that are the main determinants of recent genome-wide allele frequency change. Our approach should be applicable to the growing number of contemporary and ancient temporal population genomics datasets.

## Baker et al. (2024) PNAS: The 10,000-year biocultural history of fallow deer and its implications for conservation policy

Abstract:
Over the last 10,000 y, humans have manipulated fallow deer populations with varying outcomes. Persian fallow deer (Dama mesopotamica) are now endangered. European fallow deer (Dama dama) are globally widespread and are simultaneously considered wild, domestic, endangered, invasive and are even the national animal of Barbuda and Antigua. Despite their close association with people, there is no consensus regarding their natural ranges or the timing and circumstances of their human-mediated translocations and extirpations. Our mitochondrial analyses of modern and archaeological specimens revealed two distinct clades of European fallow deer present in Anatolia and the Balkans. Zooarchaeological evidence suggests these regions were their sole glacial refugia. By combining biomolecular analyses with archaeological and textual evidence, we chart the declining distribution of Persian fallow deer and demonstrate that humans repeatedly translocated European fallow deer, sourced from the most geographically distant populations. Deer taken to Neolithic Chios and Rhodes derived not from nearby Anatolia, but from the Balkans. Though fallow deer were translocated throughout the Mediterranean as part of their association with the Greco-Roman goddesses Artemis and Diana, deer taken to Roman Mallorca were not locally available Dama dama, but Dama mesopotamica. Romans also initially introduced fallow deer to Northern Europe but the species became extinct and was reintroduced in the medieval period, this time from Anatolia. European colonial powers then transported deer populations across the globe. The biocultural histories of fallow deer challenge preconceptions about the divisions between wild and domestic species and provide information that should underpin modern management strategies.

Significance:
Persian and European fallow deer formed part of the Levantine Neolithic Package were worshiped as Greco-Roman deities and, over millennia, were the subject of repeated human-mediated translocations and extirpations. By integrating biomolecular datasets with archaeological and textual evidence, we reveal these species’ biocultural histories—spanning their Glacial refugia to their global spread as symbols of colonial power. The deep histories of fallow deer highlight the problems inherent in dichotomous categorizations of all species as either wild or domestic. In addition, they complicate existing wildlife conservation strategies and offer alternative perspectives on the management of translocated animals.

## Melissa & Desai (2024) PNAS: A dynamical limit to evolutionary adaptation

Significance:
We often think of evolution as an optimization process that increases the fitness of a population over time through the action of natural selection on random mutations. However, this process is imperfect, and deleterious mutations can occasionally spread through a population. Depending on the mutation rates and selection pressures involved, this can overwhelm adaptation and lead to fitness decline. Here, we calculate the conditions under which natural selection can drive a population to higher fitness and characterize the scenarios that lead to fitness declines. Our results quantify the limits on the ability of natural selection to drive populations toward a fitness optimum. We analyze how these constraints can lead populations to steady-state evolutionary “attractors” that are not fitness optima.

Abstract:
Natural selection makes evolutionary adaptation possible even if the overwhelming majority of new mutations are deleterious. However, in rapidly evolving populations where numerous linked mutations occur and segregate simultaneously, clonal interference and genetic hitchhiking can limit the efficiency of selection, allowing deleterious mutations to accumulate over time. This can in principle overwhelm the fitness increases provided by beneficial mutations, leading to an overall fitness decline. Here, we analyze the conditions under which evolution will tend to drive populations to higher versus lower fitness. Our analysis focuses on quantifying the boundary between these two regimes, as a function of parameters such as population size, mutation rates, and selection pressures. This boundary represents a state in which adaptation is precisely balanced by Muller’s ratchet, and we show that it can be characterized by rapid molecular evolution without any net fitness change. Finally, we consider the implications of global fitness-mediated epistasis and find that under some circumstances, this can drive populations toward the boundary state, which can thus represent a long-term evolutionary attractor.

## Lova
Evolution
- mtDNA evolution and migration distance; slow vs. long life history; mt genomes of migratory birds; migration distance vs. mt evolution: the longer the distance, the slower the genetic changes; slower genetic change corresponding to slower life cycle
- Burns et al. (2024) Fish radiation; why radiation and why not? interaction with environment and other organisms; temporally diffused radiations; morphometrics, simulation, phylogenetic comparative methods: random evolution, habitat variation, competition for niche; fish in South America have more diverse body shape (more diverse habitats), Africa: more competition, and thus more restriction to colonise niches

Animal Conservation
- Niche modelling

## Alice
- See Slack

## Iris
- See Slack
