# Monthly Journal Review March 2024

Date: 6 May 2024
Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- PLoS Genetics (PLoS Genet)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
- [Imputation accuracy across global human populations](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.03.011)  
  imputation, human populations, out-of-sample prediction, TOPMed  
 &#x261E; *Pick*  

- [Association between telomere length and Plasmodium falciparum malaria endemicity in sub-Saharan Africans](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.04.003)  
  Africa; malaria; population genetics; telomere  
  

- [Potential corporate uses of polygenic indexes: Starting a conversation about the associated ethics and policy issues](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.03.010)  
  perspective, polygenic index, polygenic score, commercial use, genomic information, privacy, insurances, marketing  
 &#x261E; *Pick*  

- [Aspiring toward equitable benefits from genomic advances to individuals of ancestrally diverse backgrounds](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2024.04.002)  
  SDOH; carrier screening; cell-free DNA screening; cfDNA screening; diversity; genetic testing; health disparities; health equity; precision oncology; reproductive medicine; social determinants of health   
  

## Genetics
- Nothing this month.


## PLoS Biol
- Nothing this month.

## PLoS Genet
- Nothing this month.
  

## PNAS
- [Pregnancy is linked to faster epigenetic aging in young women](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2317290121)  
  biological aging; costs of reproduction; fatherhood; pregnancy  
  

- [Gentrification drives patterns of alpha and beta diversity in cities](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2318596121)  
  alpha diversity; beta diversity; camera trap; gentrification; mammals  
  

- [Coadaptation of coexisting plants enhances productivity in an agricultural system](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2305517121)  
  agriculture; coadaptation; ecosystem functioning; plant–plant interactions; trait convergence  
  

- [Mapping seasonal migration in a songbird hybrid zone -- heritability, genetic correlations, and genomic patterns linked to speciation](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2313442121)  
  genetic basis; hybrid zone; seasonal migration; songbirds; speciation  
 &#x261E; *Pick*  

- [AI model disgorgement: Methods and choices](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2307304121)  
  artificial intelligence; generative AI; machine learning; machine unlearning; model disgorgement  
 &#x261E; *Pick*  
  

## Theor Popul Biol
- Nothing this month.


# Summary of Picks

## Meyer et al. (2024) AJHG

Some commercial firms currently sell polygenic indexes (PGIs) to individual consumers, despite their relatively low predictive power. It might be tempting to assume that because the predictive power of many PGIs is so modest, other sorts of firms—such as those selling insurance and financial services—will not be interested in using PGIs for their own purposes. We argue to the contrary. We build this argument in two ways. First, we offer a very simple model, rooted in economic theory, of a profit-maximizing firm that can gain information about a single consumer’s genome. We use the model to show that, depending on the specific economic environment, a firm would be willing to pay for statistically noisy PGIs, even if they allow for only a small reduction in uncertainty. Second, we describe two plausible scenarios in which these different kinds of firms could conceivably use PGIs to maximize profits. Finally, we briefly discuss some of the associated ethics and policy issues. They deserve more attention, which is unlikely to be given until it is first recognized that firms whose services affect a large swath of the public will indeed have incentives to use PGIs.

## Cahoon et al. (2024) AJHG

Genotype imputation is now fundamental for genome-wide association studies but lacks fairness due to the underrepresentation of references from non-European ancestries. The state-of-the-art imputation reference panel released by the Trans-Omics for Precision Medicine (TOPMed) initiative improved the imputation of admixed African-ancestry and Hispanic/Latino samples, but imputation for populations primarily residing outside of North America may still fall short in performance due to persisting underrepresentation. To illustrate this point, we imputed the genotypes of over 43,000 individuals across 123 populations around the world and identified numerous populations where imputation accuracy paled in comparison to that of European-ancestry populations. For instance, the mean imputation r-squared (Rsq) for variants with minor allele frequencies between 1% and 5% in Saudi Arabians (n = 1,061), Vietnamese (n = 1,264), Thai (n = 2,435), and Papua New Guineans (n = 776) were 0.79, 0.78, 0.76, and 0.62, respectively, compared to 0.90–0.93 for comparable European populations matched in sample size and SNP array content. Outside of Africa and Latin America, Rsq appeared to decrease as genetic distances to European-ancestry reference increased, as predicted. Using sequencing data as ground truth, we also showed that Rsq may over-estimate imputation accuracy for non-European populations more than European populations, suggesting further disparity in accuracy between populations. Using 1,496 sequenced individuals from Taiwan Biobank as a second reference panel to TOPMed, we also assessed a strategy to improve imputation for non-European populations with meta-imputation, but this design did not improve accuracy across frequency spectra. Taken together, our analyses suggest that we must ultimately strive to increase diversity and size to promote equity within genetics research.

## Justen et al. (2024) PNAS

Significance
Seasonal migration is a behavioral response to seasonally changing environments that is exhibited by many taxa and has captured the attention of researchers and laypeople alike. A genetic basis for migration has been suggested for decades but detailed, genome-wide studies have only recently been permitted with advances in tracking and sequencing technology. We capitalized on these advances here, using a natural hybrid zone between songbirds and data on multiple migratory traits from hundreds of individuals to provide one of the most complete genetic characterizations of this behavior to date. Our results can be integrated in future studies to predict organismal ability to adapt to changes in the environment.

Swainson’s thrush

Abstract
Seasonal migration is a widespread behavior relevant for adaptation and speciation, yet knowledge of its genetic basis is limited. We leveraged advances in tracking and sequencing technologies to bridge this gap in a well-characterized hybrid zone between songbirds that differ in migratory behavior. Migration requires the coordinated action of many traits, including orientation, timing, and wing morphology.** We used genetic mapping to show these traits are highly heritable and genetically correlated, explaining how migration has evolved so rapidly in the past and suggesting future responses to climate change may be possible.** **Many of these traits mapped to the same genomic regions and small structural variants indicating the same, or tightly linked, genes underlie them**. Analyses integrating transcriptomic data indicate **cholinergic receptors could control multiple traits**. Furthermore, analyses integrating genomic differentiation further suggested genes underlying migratory traits help **maintain reproductive isolation in this hybrid zone**.

## Achille et al. (2024) PNAS
Abstract

Over the past few years, machine learning models have significantly increased in size and complexity, especially in the area of generative AI such as large language models. These models require massive amounts of data and compute capacity to train, to the extent that concerns over the training data (such as protected or private content) cannot be practically addressed by retraining the model “from scratch” with the questionable data removed or altered. Furthermore, despite significant efforts and controls dedicated to ensuring that training corpora are properly curated and composed, the sheer volume required makes it infeasible to manually inspect each datum comprising a training corpus. One potential approach to training corpus data defects is model disgorgement, by which we broadly mean the elimination or reduction of not only any improperly used data, but also the effects of improperly used data on any component of an ML model. Model disgorgement techniques can be used to address a wide range of issues, such as reducing bias or toxicity, increasing fidelity, and ensuring responsible use of intellectual property. In this paper, we survey the landscape of model disgorgement methods and introduce a taxonomy of disgorgement techniques that are applicable to modern ML systems. In particular, we investigate the various meanings of “removing the effects” of data on the trained model in a way that does not require retraining from scratch.

# Picks by others
Iris:
- Conservation Biology
    - Spatial conversation: priorities in conservation genetics
- Heredity
    - Inbreeding in wolfs: microsatellite-based reconstruction of pedigrees. Observe lower inbreeding than expected.
- Evol. Applications
    - Harvest effects on $N_e$, reindeer disease
    - Estimation of contemporary $N_e$: GONE estimator that uses genomic data (LD). One needs more than 20 samples from a population. Estimating contemporary $N_e$. Needs a linkage map.

Ursina:
- Journal of Applied Ecology
    - Past $N_e$ reconstruction: empirical study in bats. DIYABC RF.
- Conservation Genetics
    - Inbreeding depression in feral horses associated with traits

Daniela:
- Predicting of distribution of a plant using ecological niche modelling. Xiao et al. (2024). Pine-tree pest (nematode). Predicted niche of pest for past and future climate scenarios. Large potential habitat if spread. Increase of potential habitat in the future. Precipitation, temp. seasonality, ...

Gödze:
- Ecology and Evolution
    - Bar charts to histograms. Categorical data.
- Nature Communications
    - Genomic language model predicts function and ... DNA context and use of language model predicts function of a gene.
- Molecular Biology and Evolution
    - Bioinformatics workflow for comprehensive analyses (snakemake-based).