{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww12560\viewh6900\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Dear Authors, dear Dr. Gardner,\
\
Thank you very much for the opportunity to review this resubmitted manuscript, which I have reviewed twice before. The authors have now addressed all the major concerns, yet a number of minor concerns remain. I think these can be easily addressed by the authors in another round of careful revision. Perhaps the most important point that has not yet been changed is the readability of the small text in some of the supporting figures (axis tick labels).\
\
The authors have now added simulations with four and eight populations to support their earlier conjection. I was a bit confused by the similarity of these results to the one from the simulations testing the effect of adding an error to the parameter estimates (see my detailed comment to Figure S1 below). A brief clarification seems appropriate.\
\
\
Comments:\
---------------\
\
Abstract: I like that you added a summary of the main result of your simulation study.\
\
l. 42\'9644: This still sounds as if you focus on evolution from standing genetic variation because you (want to, for mathematical convenience?) assume that alleles were initially segregating at low frequency. I think you should turn this around and say that you are interested in studying adaptation from standing variation, which allows you to make the assumption of initially low frequencies. Therefore, I also suggest replacing "Our interest in this definition is motivated..." on l.44\'9645 by "Our decision is motivated...".\
\
l. 85\'9687: The second clause ("for example, repeated selection...") is still missing a verb.\
\
l. 121\'96125: Saying that beta is weak and that it is of order epsilon, where epsilon is small, is redundant. I suggest getting rid of the "O(epsilon)" at all from the text, and just rely on an accurate verbal description.\
\
l. 116-123: You introduce O(epsilon) without definition of epsilon, so the paragraph is strictly speaking meaningless. You still do not seem to be addressing reviewer 1's point about what happens if p_i (1 - p_i) is of the same order of magnitude (i.e. as small) as the sum over the D_ij terms (cf. Eq. S7).\
\
Strictly speaking, the equal signs in several equations after Eq. (4) should be replaced by approximately equal signs. You could avoid this by replacing "This probability is given by" before Eq. (4) by "This probability can be approximated as". Then, you can convert the approximately equal sign in Eq. (4)  back to an equal sign.\
\
I like the fact that you highlight eta in Eq. (7).\
\
l.175\'96179 I liked the additional clarification.\
\
l.192: "figure 3" -> "Figure 3"\
\
l.197: It is not necessary to say "the value of".\
\
l. 209\'96210: "...value for the parameter eta,..." -> "...value of the parameter eta,..."?\
\
l.237: "using the Wright\'96Fisher model" -> "under the Wright\'96Fisher model"\
\
l. 261: The comma should be after, not before, "(Figure 1C)".\
\
l.319: Replace full stop by comma after "distant optimum"\
\
l.322: "figure 4" -> "Figure 4"? Please check the journal's requirements\
\
l.330\'96341: I liked this reformulated part, as it now provides a good overview of the effects of your assumptions.\
\
l.348: Insert comma after "overlap zero"\
\
l.364: "population sizes very large" -> "population sizes are very loarge"\
\
l. 405: My previous comment to what used to be l.384 (see below) has been addressed by including simulations with more than two populations (Figure S1, right-most column). Citing from my previous review:\
"l. 384: I did not spend much time thinking about this: But is it proven that it does not matter for the accuracy and efficiency of the estimator whether the data comprise few loci in many populations or vice versa? Without a proof, I suggest backing away from this point. You assessed the performance of the estimator only for two populations. I am fine with a statement about the number of loci, but not with a statement about the number of populations, as far as the performance of the estimator is concerned. I suspect that the effect of the number of populations will strongly depend on how you define parallel evolution. Since you use the most restrictive definition possible (fixation in all m populations), any conclusion from this would not necessarily be very generic."\
I was surprised by the similarity between the right-most column in Figure S1 and the one for "Errors in parameters". Please provide an explanation if appropriate.\
\
l.413: Delete comma before "that".\
\
l.436: "provides" -> "is" or "offers" (to avoid repeating "provides"; see l.434)\
\
References: I think page ranges should be denoted by an en-dash, rather than a hyphen.\
\
l.449: Please write the full journal name.\
\
l.473: Please check if it should say "MC1R" or "Mc1r".\
\
l.490: Is the page range missing?\
\
l.511\'96512: For consistence, change first letters of words to lower case. Please fix/check the page range.\
\
l.563: Please change "Fit" and "Data" to lowercase.\
\
l.565: Perhaps: "Closed points" -> "Filled points"?\
\
l.566: "does not (do) overlap" -> "does (not) overlap"\
\
l.571: Please change hat(eta) from bold to regular font, and introduce a space after the "equal to" sign.\
\
Figures:\
\
Figure 3: Please increase the font size for the axis tick labels. Moreover, I suggest reducing the number of different font types and shapes used.\
\
Figure 4: Thanks for correcting this to match the values from the QTL method. Please increase the font size for the axis tick labels and the summary of results in red and blue. You do not seem to have addressed the following previous comment:\
"In Figure 4, please revise the blue text below the panel in the middle row in the column for 2 loci: check if intercept and slope are in the correct order and that the order is consistent with the other panels. It seems as if the former is correct, but the latter needs to be rectified."\
\
Figure 5: Thanks for clarifying what the grey proportions of the bars mean.\
\
\
Supplementary Material:\
\
Section A\
\
\
\
- Did you address this previous point? "On the first line, it says "parallel phenotypic evolution", but given point 1) of reviewer 1 and the authors' response to it, I think it should now read "parallel genetic evolution (from standing genetic variation)". "Parallel phenotypic evolution" still appears multiple times at other places in the Supplementary Material. Please adjust as appropriate."\
\
- Equation (S4): Please add a comma after "effect of locus" just before the equation. Please rectify the the position of the equation label "(S4)".\
\
- Before Eq. (S5): "...for relative fitness" -> "...for the relative fitness,"\
\
- Please add a comma immediately after Eq. (S6a).\
\
- Given that there is a term "O(a_i^2) in Eq. (S8), you should replace the "approximately equal to" by an "equal to" sign.\
\
- If I am not mistaken, the issue of what happens if p_i (1 - p_i) is of the same order as D_\{ij\} is still not addressed (see a point of reviewer 1 from the first round of review).\
\
- Before Eq. (S9), change "Wright-Fisher model" -> "Wright\'96Fisher model,"\
\
- Replace the first "equal to" sign in Eq. (S10) by an "approximately equal to" sign.\
\
- Third-to-last line before Eq. (S11): "equation 5" -> "equation (5)".\
\
- Before Eq. (S11): Please give a reference for the alternative definition as "the repeated fixation in x of the m descendent populations".  "The probability of parallel evolution defined this way is given by" -> "The probablity of parallel evolution defined this way can be approximated as"\
\
\
Section B\
\
- Thanks for clarifying the definition of J(eta, eta*).\
\
\
Section C\
\
- Thanks for changing the parameter for the migration rate.\
\
\
Figure S1 (caption): "...with variable number of populations" -> "with a variable number of populations"; replace comma after "number of populations" by colon (":"); delete "respectively"; "triagnle" -> "triangle" (THIS OCCURS TWICE); "Wright Fisher" -> "Wright\'96Fisher"; "Explinations" -> "Explanations"; "given in main text" -> "given in the main text"; "supplimentary" -> "supplementary". My previous comments have only been partially addressed:\
\
"Thanks for introducing Figure S1. I suggest improving the colour scheme and reducing the size of the symbols. It is currently hard to distinguish points based on features other than colour. Sometimes the red square, circle, and triangle overlap in such a way that it is hard to discern them. I suggest using a graphical legend. Caption: "method" missing after "candidate gene"? "Explinations" -> "Explanations". "supplimentary" -> "supplementary". Please improve the language/grammar in the last sentence of the caption (e.g. repetition of "as well"). Why does introducing 10% error in p_0 and b result in higher R^2 than introducing 10% error in only one of p_0 or b? Please increase the font size for text on top and at the bottom of the figure."\
\
My following previous comment has not been addressed:\
"I wonder if it could help to add a similar figure showing the slope, rather than the R^2. This is because I find it hard to see why R^2 alone should be the statistic of choice to judge the performance of your method. You could have a very shallow slope, but still explain a decent proportion of the variance, and the other way round. Figure 4 illustrates this problem to some extent."\
\
Tables S2 to S8: Thanks for adding this! Caption: "...to the true value in the simulation eta, and the..." -> "...to the tue values of eta from simulations, and the..."; change "or" from italic to regular font on the second-to-last line.\
\
Table S5: I still wonder about the following: "For 8 loci and 2 migrants per generation, the slopes appear to be considerably larger than 1. Is this due to an underestimation of eta when the true eta is low, or due to an overestimation when it is high? Or both?}