{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10100\viewh13640\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Dear Authors, dear Dr. Gardner,\
\
Thank you very much for the opportunity to review this resubmitted manuscript. I agree that it has been significantly improved and think that the authors have addressed the major concerns. There are still a few points where I disagree with the authors, and I therefore think an editorial decision might be helpful. This includes the emphasis on the estimator being Bayesian, the extent to which the impact of the distribution of fitness effects is understood (and needs to be for this study), or the presentation of Eq. (6).\
\
I have a number of further comments, mostly trying to increase clarity in those sections that have been added or amended by the authors for this revised version. Some comments also relate to a consistent typesetting (e.g. header format, punctuation around display equations) and will need another round of careful editing.\
\
Some remaining major concerns relate to the graphical representation of the new Figure S1 (which I like!), to the new equation at the bottom of p. 4 in the Supplementary Material, which I think is wrong, to a lack of clarity about the altered prior for eta and its consequences on Figure 4. \cf2 TODO: Complete this paragraph.\cf0 \
\
I think that the authors should be able to address these concerns without too much work.\
\
Kind regards,\
Simon Aeschbacher\
\
\
\
Comments\
--------\
\
TODO: Go on with the Discussion.\
\
\cf2 TODO:\cf0 \
\
- Is the effect of gene flow among descendent populations discussed enough in the main text?\
- Looking at the previous and current versions of Figure 4, results seem to have changed quite a bit in terms of the variance explained (R^2) and slopes and intercepts. Why is that? Did changing the prior for eta have that much of an impact?\
- How exactly was the prior range for eta changed?\
- Does Figure S1 really support the major claims being made?\
\
I wonder if, in the abstract, you wanted to add a sentence on your conclusion on l. 411-413 in the Discussion.\
\
l. 1: Deleter ":" after "Abstract"\
\
l. 16: Delete ":" after "Introduction"\
\
l. 32: "phenomena" -> "phenomenon" (it is singular here if it refers to "parallel evolution")\
\
l. 37: Perhaps insert "level" after "phenotypic" to be clearer.\
\
l. 39: "levels" -> "frequency" (to avoid repeating "level"). Remark: These frequencies do not need to be low initially to justify focussing on standing genetic variation.\
\
l. 47 and 52: For additional clarity early on, please insert "de novo" between "beneficial" and "mutation(s)" at these two places.\
\
l. 53-54: It seems more accurate to say "multiple phenotypic traits" instead of "multiple phenotypes".\
\
l. 65: "effect of" -> "effect on".\
\
l. 67: "further develop" -> "enhance" (to avoid using "develop" twice in the same sentence.\
\
l. 69-71: I suggest you mention the assumption of the quasi-linkage equilibrium here to more accurately describe the scope of the paper. \
\
l. 72: "routinely" reads strange to me; "historical strength of parallel selection" -> "average strength of parallel selection over time"\
\
l. 75 vs l. 98: Please be consistent in using or not ":" at the end of paragraph headings. This conflic occurs at other places in the manuscript.\
\
l. 76-77: I think the reference to Figure A1 should be at the end of the sentence for better reading flow.\
\
l. 79-82: Please amend this sentence. The second clause is missing a verb, which made it sound incomplete to me.\
\
l. 84: It seems as if a sentence is missing after this one. Why do you envision these two designs?\
\
l. 90: Suggestion: replace "candidate gene test" by "candidate gene method" and surround it with quotes (as for QTL method on l. 95).\
\
l. 100: No need to surround "i" by commas here.\
\
l. 104-105: Spaces seems to be missing between "b_i" and "is", and between "p_i" and "and".\
\
l. 116-123: You introduce O(epsilon) without definition of epsilon, so the paragraph is strictly speaking meaningless. You still do not seem to be addressing reviewer 1's point about what happens if p_i (1 - p_i) is of the same order of magnitude (i.e. as small) as the sum over the D_ij terms (cf. Eq. S7).\
\
l. 125-126: Strictly speaking it is wrong to say that Eq. (3) "reveals" that epistasis and LD can be ignored, because it was derived under exactly these two assumptions! Please rectify.\
\
l. 129: Please correct the subscript to the initial frequency (it should be the number "0" instead of italic "o").\
\
l. 131-131: This is only an approximation! Please make this clear and replace "=" by an approximate sign in Eq (4).\
\
l. 135-149: Thanks for pointing out that i is for the loci. I was wrong. I still think it is misleading that you introduce an index i to p_0 here. Does the initial frequency vary among loci in a systematic way? I know it does in your simulations, but do you account for that in your theoretical predictions, too?\
\
l. 144: I still think Eq. (6) should be simplified by using P_fix(i) rather than repeating the expression from Eq. (5). This is the whole point of defining expressions and is makes it more transparent how you define parallel evolution. Add a full stop immediately after Eq. (6).\
\
l. 148: "are provided" -> "is provided"\
\
l. 150-159: It is not very clear if the existence of the compound parameter N beta / alpha is what you refer to the fourth important factor. You explicitly enumerate only three, but announce four. In relation to my comment about Eq. (6), none of these four factors are specific to Eq. (6), but they can be seen from Eq. (5). This fact also illustrates that the four points do not arise as a consequence of studying parallel evolution, but simply as a consequence of previous work. I'd therefore suggest to at least say "Equations (5) and (6) highlight..." on line 150.\
\
l. 165: Add a comma immediately after Eq. (7). Again, I think this equation should be expressed in terms of terms previously introduced, i.e. in terms of Eq. (5).\
\
l. 176: I'd avoid "surprising".\
\
l. 181-186: I still think the impact of the effect size distribution is poorely explored and motivated. An additional explanatory sentence on line 185 might be appropriate.\
\
l. 184: "...other words is most likely..." -> "other words, parallel evolution at a large number of loci is most likely..." The question remains *why* the shape and rate parameters only start playing a role when both the initial frequency and the number of QTLs becomes large.\
\
l. 186: I did not like "surprising" in this sentence. Could you be more specific?\
\
l. 190: I think "rigorously" is not necessary here, and it is occurring again on l. 193.\
\
l. 193: "possibly" -> "possible"\
\
l. 195: Perhaps: "adaptation" -> "natural selection"\
\
l. 200: "for" -> "of"\
\
l. 209: "... can be used to develop a Bayesian tool for estimating..." -> "... can be used in a Bayesian setting to estimate..."\
\
l. 213: Traditionally, the prior is typeset after the likelihood in Bayes' theorem.\
\
l. 215-216: "we employ Markov Chain Monte Carlo simulation methods to..." -> "we use a Markov Chain Monte Carlo algorithm to..."\
\
l. 219-220: "...using a Wright-Fisher model" -> "using Wright-Fisher type simulations".\
\
l. 237-238: The comma should be after, not before, "(Figure 1B)".\
\
l. 250: The prior range for eta does not seem to have changed (-60 to 60), although you are saying you did change it in your response to point 4) of reviewer 1.\
\
l. 252-253: A range of 30 to 60% of variance explained does not seem to be in agreement with the values presented in Table S1. Please rectify.\
\
l. 288: "optima" -> "optimum"\
\
l. 296-302: "be averaging" -> "by averaging". Insert comma after "Cov(z,w)/Var(z).\
\
l. 303: Delete "Bayesian"\
\
l. 317: Insert a comma before "when gene flow occurs among...".\
\
l. 321: I think some more details would be appropriate here about the effects of the different violations to your assumptions. You should discuss the qualitative effects of gene flow, as well as of different selection gradients in the two populations, as these may lead to a strong reduction in the percentage of variance explained, as seen in Figure S1.\
\
l. 360: Should "all-be-it" be "albeit"?\
\
l. 437: "Plos Biology" -> "PLOS Biology" or "PLoS Biology"?. Please revise if necessary. Applies to all references to papers in PLoS journals!\
\
l. 523: "candidate genet method" -> "candidate gene method\
\
Thanks for introducing Figure S1. I suggest improving the colour scheme and reducing the size of the symbols. It is currently hard to distinguish points based on features other than colour. Sometimes the red square, circle, and triangle overlap in such a way that it is hard to discern them. I suggest using a graphical legend. Caption: "method" missing after "candidate gene"? "Explincations" -> "Explanations". "suplimentary" -> "suplementary". Please improve the language/grammar in the last sentence of the caption (e.g. repetition of "as well"). Why does introducing 10% error in p_0 and b result in higher R^2 than introducing 10% error in only one of p_0 or b? Please increase the font size for text on top and at the bottom of the figure.\
\
I wonder if it could help to add a similar figure showing the slope, rather than the R^2. This is because I find it hard to see why R^2 alone should be the statistic of choice to judge the performance of your method. You could have a very shallow slope, but still explain a decent proportion of the variance, and the other way round. Figure 4 illustrates this problem to some extent.\
\
In Figure 4, please revise the blue text below the panel in the middle row in the column for 2 loci: check if intercept and slope are in the correct order and that the order is consistent with the other panels. It seems as if the former is correct, but the latter needs to be rectified. Perhaps: "Closed points" -> "Filled points"?\
\
Also regarding Figure 4: The title says that it refers to the results from the QTL method, but when I compare the values to those in Table S2, it seems they match with the ones from the candidate gene method. Please clarify this.\
\
Table S5: For 8 loci and 2 migrants per generation, the slopes appear to be considerably larger than 1. Is this due to an underestimation of eta when the true eta is low, or due to an overestimation when it is high? Or both?\
\
There was no answer to my previous point 5), but I acknowledge that you now make clear that the focus is not on recurrent mutations.\
\
Figure 5: What do the grey parts of the bars mean? Please describe.\
\
\
Supplementary Material\
\
Section A\
\
- In general, punctuation marks should be added immediately after the equation, on the same line as the equation. I would suggest replacing colons (:) immediately before equations by commas. This is a matter of style, but also not consistent at the moment.\
\
- On the first line, it says "parallel phenotypic evolution", but given point 1) of reviewer 1 and the authors' response to it, I think it should now read "parallel genetic evolution (from standing genetic variation)". "Parallel phenotypic evolution" still appears multiple times at other places in the Supplementary Material. Please adjust as appropriate.\
\
- Immediately before the unnumbered equation between Eq. (S2) and Eq. (S3) there should be a comma. Then, add a full stop immediately after the "alpha" of the equation.\
\
- I suggest that a comma be added after equations that are followed by descriptive clauses starting with "where..." or similar. This applies, for instance, to the unnumbered equation between Eq. (S2) and Eq. (S3), or to Eq. (S2). I am not going to repeat myself, but there are a number of places where the formatting/punctuation around equations eventually needs to be improved and made consistent.\
\
- Referring to the sentence "Where \\bar\{z\} is the average phenotype... as defined in equation (S1)": Strictly speaking, \\bar\{z\} is not defined in Eq. (S1); Eq. (S1) is merely a function of \\bar\{z\}, and \\bar\{z\} is only given a verbal definition throughout.\
\
- Between Eq. (S4) and Eq. (S5), there should be a comma before "which gives a general expression...".\
\
- After Eq. (S7), "Where" must be lower-case. The issue of what happens if p_i (1 - p_i) is of the same order as D_\{ij\} is still not addressed (see \cf2 point X\cf0  of reviewer 1).\
\
- After Eq. (S10), replace "which is equation (4) and (5)..." by "which corresponds to equations (4) and (5)...".\
\
- Middle of p. 4: "equation 6 and 7..." -> "equations (6) and (7)...".\
\
- The new equation for P|| on p. 4 is not the probability of "at least" x fixations, but of *exactly* x fixations! The probabilit of *at least* x fixations is the sum of the probabilities of x, x+1, ..., m fixations:\
\
	P|| = sum_\{i=x\}^\{m\} choose(m, i) P_fix^\{i\} (1 - P_fix)^\{m-i\}.\
\
Please rectify. Immediately after the new equation for P||, there must be a comma, and the "Where" thereafter must be lower-case.\
\
\
Section B\
\
- I still think an introductory sentence before "At the conclusion of the individual based simulations..." is missing, and that the sentecne "One important feature of teh MCMC sampling... in describing the posterior" is unnecessary (see my previous comments to that paragraph). If you omit it, please adjust the sentence right after that one accordingly. Please replace "we will simulate m = 5 sequences..." by "We simulated M = 5 sequences..." (m -> M).\
\
- It is, in principle, still not clear whether J(eta, eta*) is the probability of jumping from eta to eta*, or of jumping from eta* to eta. If one knows the MH algorithm, one can figure it out from the equation for h in step 3 of the algorithm, but you cannot assume that from an average JEB reader. In practice, it does not matter because you use a uniform distribution.\
\
- Replace "m" by "M" after point 4 of the algorithm.\
\
- In step 5, please correct the sentence "Calculate the following expression weighting of the variances...". The formulation did not make sense to me. Delete the colon after "where" and add a full stop immediately after the equation for W.\
\
- In step 6, perhaps replace "of the peak of the posterior distribution" by "of the posterior mode" to be more accurate.\
\
\
Section C\
\
- Because the parameter m is reserved to the number of populations, you should use a different symbol for the migration rate! Please replace consistently. Please remove the comma after Nm = 2 in the last sentence. \cf2 TODO: Check if the overestimation of the strength of selection is really slight when Nm = 2.\cf0 \
\
\
Section E\
\
- Remove brackets around "Table S7" in the last sentence.\
\
- Please make clear whether the two populations still share the same initial allele frequency (even after addition of an error) or if you now draw two random frequencies, one for each population.\
\
I still think there is an overuse of "Bayesian Estimator" (upper-case spelling) as a name of your estimator. At other places, "estimator" is lower-case, but you still add "Bayesian" in front. It's not consistent. There's no need to repeat "Bayesian" that often, as your estimate is essentially the same likelihood-based estimator whether interpreted as Bayesian or not, because you are using a uniform prior.\
\
All my other comments and questions have been addressed.\
}