{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1561\cocoasubrtf600
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue0;\red9\green80\blue208;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\csgray\c0;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c0\c41176\c85098;
}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf2 From: vera.domingues@nature.com\
Subject: Decision made for NATECOLEVOL-18074839\
Date: 14 September 2018 at 10:50:44 CEST\
To: simon.aeschbacher@ieu.uzh.ch\
Reply-To: vera.domingues@nature.com\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec3 Dear Simon,\
\
Thank you for reviewing the Review "Insights from genomes into the evolutionary importance and prevalence of hybridization in nature" for Nature Ecology & Evolution.\
\
Based on your and the other referees' comments (appended below, for your reference), we have invited the authors to revise the manuscript and resubmit the paper after addressing the criticisms raised.\
\
We realize that your schedule is full and we very much appreciate the time you've taken to provide us with a constructive review.\
\
Thank you again for your help and I hope that we can call upon your advice in the future.\
\
Best wishes, \
\
Vera\
\
Vera Domingues, PhD\
Senior Editor\
Nature Ecology and Evolution\
\
\
**We greatly welcome your feedback as a peer reviewer for Nature Ecology & Evolution. Please follow this {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://springernature.eu.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_b7SYXaPdUko7LHD?J=143"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 link}} to complete a brief survey on your experience in reviewing this paper.\
\
\
Reviewer Comments: \
\
Reviewer #1:\
Remarks to the Author:\
Taylor and Larson review the current literature on the prevalence and evolutionary importance of hybridization. I found the review to be an excellent summary of the current literature and major questions in the field. I have a few suggestions for improvement from reading the paper that I outline below:\
\
1) I wasn't sure why the authors focused on ancient hybridization as a distinct topic here, as the rest of their paper focuses more on the functional outcomes. Perhaps it is worth distinguishing between the technical and practical issues raised by studying ancient hybridization and the unanswered biological questions addressed later. In that vein I was wondering if there were other technical issues/advances that could be discussed, such as new methods for inferring selection against hybridization (e.g. Sedghifar et al. 2016 among others) and new methods for inferring ancient hybridization events when the source populations are unknown ("ghost admixture methods" like Skov et al. 2018). Later in that section the authors focus on the importance of ancient hybridization events in understanding the long-term consequences of hybridization and if that is the main emphasis I think that could be brought up earlier in the section.\
2) Another question I had was whether the authors would think it useful to add a section on the role of selection in limiting introgression or structuring the distribution of introgresison locally in the genome (sort of the inverse of the adaptive introgression section). This may be my bias but I have come to find this a very important piece of the puzzle, although it is covered in some other reviews as well. \
3) I was hoping the authors could expand on this comment in the text: "inferring adaptive introgression from genomic signatures alone should be done with caution." I think one of the main issues is that not many genomic tests are designed for admixed genomes, and thus can generate lots of false positives. Methods like ancestry frequency outliers are designed for admixed genomes but have similar limitations to e.g. Fst scans, when the number of selected sites is unknown. Furthermore, processes like heterosis can generate these signals without adaptive per se (see recent work by Bernard Kim et al. 2018). Perhaps this is a moment to appeal for the development of new methods to distinguish these processes.\
\
Minor comments:\
line 63: is hominids or hominins meant here?\
line 99: modify to recent studies?\
I thought that the conservation focus at the end of the ancient hybridization section might be better moved elsewhere (maybe a section on other implications or similar)\
line 298: I found the Lamichhaney study very interesting but wondered about the resilence of these types of barriers over long time periods (e.g. as in Schumer et al. 2017).\
line 308: Also helpful to mention experiment more by Greig et al in yeast that makes similar conclusions\
line 380: I agree that haplotype based methods will give greater insights but also require much better ancestry inference and phasing approaches than exist for most species\
line 587: Did the authors intend to highlight this line of the table?\
\
Sincerely,\
\
Molly Schumer\
\
\
\
Reviewer #2:\
Remarks to the Author:\
# Summary\
\
Taylor and Larson present a concise and well-written review on recent developments in the study of hybridisation in the era of genomics. The authors focus on the prevalence of ancient hybridisation, the challenges of demonstrating an adaptive nature of introgression, and the on-going debate about the importance of hybridisation as a direct mechanism of speciation. These are long-standing questions in evolutionary biology that are now becoming more accessible with the availability of high-resolution genome sequences from a growing range of taxa. The review is therefore timely. The authors nicely place these questions into the historical context, summarise recent achievements, and discuss the challenges that remain to be addressed. Overall, I have no doubt that this review will be informative and relevant to a broad readership. I only had a few comments that might help towards diversifying the cited research and that might lead to a slightly more positive view on what we can expect\
to learn from population-genomic approaches without direct measures of fitness.\
\
# Comments\
\
**1.** In l. 149\'96151 you may want to refer to Harris et al. 2016 (doi: 10.1534/genetics.116.186890) and Juri\'e7 et al. 2016 (doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1006340) for studies that explicitly demonstrate and quantify the extent and strength of purifying selection against Neanderthal-derived introgressed variants. The same references may seem relevant in the context of line 164.\
\
**2.** In the context of conservation (lines 202\'96210) and/or hybridisation between wild and domesticated organisms (lines 257\'96258), an example worth mentioning is the introgression from domestic goat of variation at the MHC into the wild relative Alpine ibex studied by Grossen et al. 2014 (10.1371/journal.pgen.1004438). The authors report sweep-like signatures surrounding the focal MHC region in Alpine ibex and conclude that introgression is likely adaptive. However, direct evidence in terms of fitness measures is lacking. \
\
**3.** I very much appreciate the authors' cautious plea for direct evidence in terms of fitness estimates and/or a demonstrated adaptive function of the questionable gene(s) before adaptive introgression is inferred (lines 268\'96274). However, introgression may over time have lost its measurable adaptive nature, as the introgressed haplotypes have reached very high frequency or because the environment has changed (again). Such historically adaptive introgression may be very challenging to demonstrate other than by indirect population-genomic methods. In addition, showing direct evidence for adaptive introgression may remain logistically or legally impossible for a number of organisms. In summary, I would therefore vote for a slightly less pessimistic view of indirect population-genomic inference as a means of demonstrating evidence for adaptive introgression. There is still quite some activity on-going in the field towards improving the specificity and resolution of such indirect\
inference methods, and it would seem too early for a conclusive judgement of this approach. \
\
\
# Minor comments\
\
l. 18: "The extent that hybridization" -> "The extent to which hybridisation"\
l. 74: Add a period after "Meier et al. 2017)"\
l. 245: "except in non-model organisms" -> "except in model organisms" (?)\
Table 1: 1st column: "invasive sculpin" -> "Invasive sculpin"\
\
\
\
Reviewer #3:\
Remarks to the Author:\
In this review the authors set out to discuss what insights have been and will be gained into the evolutionary importance and prevalence of hybridization in nature from the analysis of genomes. They focus, in turn, on the detection and analysis of ancient hybridization, adaptive introgression, and hybrid speciation. Most of the literature referred to relates to recent studies conducted on animals. Although there is value in reviewing this topic, I am concerned that this review is somewhat biased and incomplete in its coverage. Most notably, in the discussion of hybrid speciation, no mention at all is made of allopolyploidy. Instead, the focus is entirely on homoploid hybrid speciation, currently considered to be a rather rare form of speciation. Allopolyploidy is known to be a major mechanism of plant speciation and the analysis of genome-wide data is providing greater insights into this process from various standpoints. For example, it enables identification of the different\
parent genomes brought together and maintained in an allopolyploid species even when one or more of the parent species has/have become extinct (see Luo et al. 2017). Furthermore, it provides insights into rapid genomic changes that occur following an allopolyploid origin resulting in genome size reduction, diploidization, genome dominance etc. (see the many papers by Jonathan Wendel and others on this). Clearly, allopolyploidy is an important mechanism of hybrid speciation (a least in plants) and it is essential, therefore, to discuss it in a review that considers the significance of genome analysis to an understanding of such speciation. \
\
On the topic of homoploid hybrid speciation, the authors accept Schumer and colleagues\'92 proposals that it can only be considered proven if it is demonstrated that reproductive isolation (prezygotic and/or postzygotic) of the hybrid from its parents results directly from hybridization. This is despite the fact that others (e.g. Nieto Feliner et al. 2017, referred to in the text) have problems accepting this strict criterion. Acceptance of the criterion becomes tricky when inferring what constitutes a homoploid hybrid species. Thus, towards the end of the section on hybrid speciation the authors state, \'93Clearly, there are an increasing number of taxa for which hybridization has likely played an important role in their evolution. Some appear to be of hybrid origin, but whether they are homoploid hybrid species, or have experienced ongoing or irregular gene flow with close relatives throughout their evolutionary history remains unclear in most cases. Generally, however, there is\
insufficient data to demonstrate homoploid hybrid speciation.\'94 I am left asking what to call a hybrid known to be a sexually reproducing, self-perpetuating independent entity, which must, therefore, be reproductively isolated from its parents. Why can\'92t it be called a homoploid hybrid species? We refer to non-hybrid, sexually reproducing, self-perpetuating independent entities that are reproductively isolated from other such types as species, usually without knowing the details of how they became or currently are reproductively isolated. Why shouldn\'92t we do the same for the above hybrids. I would like the authors to help out here, rather than leaving this problem in limbo. \
\
One insight into the evolutionary importance of hybridization gained from genome wide analyses not mentioned in this review concerns the genetic structure of hybrid zones and the likelihood of introgression. Studies of hybrid zones between two poplar (Populus) species using a relatively low number of genetic markers initially indicated that hybrids were later-generation recombinants (Lexer et al. 2005, 2010; Lindtke et al. 2012) indicating introgression between the species. However, when several hundred thousands of SNPs were later employed in the analysis, it became clear that most hybrids were in fact F1s and that strong selection against post-F1 hybrids likely occurred in these hybrid zones (Lindtke et al. 2014; Christe et al. 2016) thus preventing introgression from occurring. Further studies are required to determine whether or not such greater insight from genome-wide analyses might be obtained for the genetic structure of other hybrid zones.\
\
Lastly, I would like to take issue with the general claim made at the end of paragraph 5 of the Introduction that already from genome analyses \'93..we have gained many interesting and exciting insights into the role of hybridization in adaptation and speciation.\'94 I would argue that we are only at the beginning of this and that further insights will be largely gained in the future. The results of the few analyses conducted to date involving genome-wide analysis offer promise; however, most current insights have been gained from analyses based on relatively small numbers of molecular markers. This may seem picky, but I don\'92t think one should over-egg the advances, gained so far from genome-wide analyses, except perhaps in regard to allopolyploidy!\
\
Additional minor edits, comments and suggestions are provided on the annotated WORD file of the manuscript.\
\
References:\
\
Christe C, St\'f6lting KN, Bresadola L, Fussi B, Heinze B, Wegman D, Lexer C. 2016. Selection against recombinant hybrids maintains reproductive isolation in hybridizing Populus species despite F1 fertility and recurrent gene flow. Molecular Ecology 25: 2482-2498.\
\
Lexer C, Fay MF, Joseph JA, Nica M-S HB. 2005. Barrier to gene flow between two ecologically divergent Populus species, P. alba (white poplar) and P. tremula (European aspen): the role of ecology and life history in gene introgression.\
Molecular Ecolology 14:1045\'961057.\
\
Lexer C, Joseph JA, Van Loo M, Barbara T, Heinze B, Bartha D, Castiglione S, Fay MF, Buerkle CA. 2010. Genomic admixture analysis in European Populus spp.\
reveals unexpected patterns of reproductive isolation and mating. Genetics 186:699\'96712.\
\
Lindtke D, Buerkle CA, Barbar\'e1 T, Heinze B, Castiglione S, Bartha D, Lexer C. 2012. Recombinant hybrids retain heterozygosity at many loci: new insights into the genomics of reproductive isolation in Populus. Molecular Ecology 21: 5042\'965058.\
\
Lindtke D, Gompert Z, Lexer C, Buerkle A. 2014. Unexpected ancestry of Populus seedlings from a hybrid zone implies a large role for postzygotic selection in the\
maintenance of species. Molecular Ecology 23: 4316\'964330.\
\
Luo X et al. 2017. Chasing ghosts: allopolyploid origin of Oxyria sinensis (Polygonaceae) from its only diploid congener and an unknown ancestor. Molecular Ecology 26:3037-3049\
\
\
\
\
\
\
This email has been sent through the Springer Nature Tracking System NY-610A-NPG&MTS\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0

\i \cf3 Confidentiality Statement:\
\
This e-mail is confidential and subject to copyright. Any unauthorised use or disclosure of its contents is prohibited. If you have received this email in error please notify our Manuscript Tracking Tracking System Helpdesk team at {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://platformsupport.nature.com/"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 http://platformsupport.nature.com}} .\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0
\cf3 Details of the confidentiality and pre-publicity policy may be found here {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.nature.com/authors/policies/confidentiality.html"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 http://www.nature.com/authors/policies/confidentiality.html}} 
\i0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\sa240\partightenfactor0
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.nature.com/info/privacy.html"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 Privacy Policy}} | {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://mts-natecolevol.nature.com/"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 Update Profile}}\uc0\u8232 DISCLAIMER: This e-mail is confidential and should not be used by anyone who is not the original intended recipient. If you have received this e-mail in error please inform the sender and delete it from your mailbox or any other storage mechanism. Springer Nature Limited does not accept liability for any statements made which are clearly the sender's own and not expressly made on behalf of\'a0Springer Nature\'a0Ltd or one of their agents.\u8232 Please note that Springer Nature Limited and their agents and affiliates do not accept any responsibility for viruses or malware that may be contained in this e-mail or its attachments and it is your responsibility to scan the e-mail and attachments (if any).\u8232 \
}