# Review of Manuscript NATECOLEVOL-211215366 by Kersten et al. "Standing genetic variation fuels rapid evolution of herbicide resistance in blackgrass"

## Publication criteria by Nat. Ecol. Evol.
- Present an advance in understanding likely to influence thinking in the field: [reinforcing the predominant view that ]
- Strong evidence for the conclusions: [moderate evidence, simulations indicate plausibility of conclusions drawn, but do not provide evidence compelling enough, no inferential framework used to support conclusion; expand; use statistics developed to differentiate between SSV and SDM, e.g. iHS or EHH (haplotype-based), or Tajima's D and Fay & Wu's H (SFS-based)]
- Discernible reason why the work deserves visibility of a Nature Portfolio journal rather than the best specialist journals: [yes, expand]

## Decisions
- [ ] Acceptance without editorial revisions
- [x] Invitation to revise before final decision
- [x] Reject with indication that further work might justify a resubmission
- [ ] Reject outright (reasons: specialist interest, lack of novelty, insufficient conceptual advance, major technical and/or interpretational problems)

## Summary
Kersten and colleagues here report a study aiming to better understand the genetic basis and evolutionary processes underlying rapid adaptation. The authors use as a study system the evolution of resistance to acetolactase synthase (ALS) and acetyl-CoA carboxuylase (ACCase) inhibiting herbicides in blackgrass (*Alopecurus myosuroides*), a major weed in cereal crops in the temperate climate zone including Europe. Kersten et al. first report on the de-novo assembly and annotation of a novel blackgrass reference genome based on PacBio long-read and Hi-C library DNA sequencing, as well as Illumina short-read and PacBio IsoSeq long-read RNA sequencing data. The authors use SNPs called from ddRADseq data from 1,122 plants representing 44 populations from nine European countries and three herbicide sensitive reference populations for population and phylogenetic analyses. These analyses revealed weak, but apparent population structure and a signal of admixture.
To explore the extent and nature of non-target site resistance (NTSR) to ACCase, the authors performed a bulked-segregant analysis with two cohorts formed of plants that were highly sensitive (dead) vs. quasi-insensitive to treatment with ACCase inhibiting herbicide. A genome-scan for SNPs with a statistically significant association with treatment revealed candidate genes underlying NTSR.
The authors also investigated the diversity, geographical distribution and evolutionary relationship of haplotypes harbouring target-site resistance (TSR) mutations at the ACCase and ALS genes. Combining the empirical patterns of haplotype diversity and distribution with theoretical predictions and forward-simulations, the authors argue that TSR resistance in blackgrass likely represents a case of adaptation from standing genetic variation (SGV), as opposed to de-novo genetic variation (DGV).
The manuscript is well written overall, but details on the assembly at the beginning of the Results section might be too technical for the readers of this journal. Some details in the Methods should be explained more precisely to enhance the reproducibility of this research. My most important concerns (outlined below) relate to the strength of the evidence provided to make a case for adaptation from SGN. I think that the role of gene flow (apparent from the ADMIXTURE plots) is not explored well enough as a potentially important force shaping the dynamics of adaptation in the study system. I suggest that the major concerns raised below should be addressed before the manuscript can be published in this journal.

## Major concerns

1. The first part of the Results & Discussion section describes the de-novo assembled blackgrass genome and emphasises features of the genome (synteny to rize and barley, paralogs, orthologs) that do not seem to be immediately related to the main questions of the study. This part is also rather technical and thus difficult to understand by the target audience of the journal. I thus doubt that this part should be presented in the main text to the present level of detail. I imagine that a very short summary in the main text would do, and the more technical aspects could be moved to a supplementary text.
2. Related to point 1, the authors detected in their new blackgrass assembly an enrichment of collinear paralogs (anchors) showing low synonymous distance $K_S$ (peak at low values in the distribution of $K_S$ in Supplementary Figure 1). The authors indicate that these weakly diverged anchors might be due to insufficiently filtered contigs that were misassembled in regions of high heterozygosity. This explanation seems plausible, but also somewhat concerning, because such misassembly would appear to bias down-stream analyses, both in this study and in future studies using the assembly. I suggest the authors invest more effort into confirming the putative cause of these low-divergence anchors. If appropriate, the authors should devise a way to curate this issue, or instead provide evidence that this assembly artefact is unlikely to bias their findings.
3. The analyses of population structure and phylogenetic relationships in Figure 2 consistently show evidence for at least five distinct groups of populations. While this structure seems to be weak, what I found striking is that it is not (or only weakly) correlated with the country of origin. If one takes the country of origin as a proxy for geography, then genetic variation does not seem to be (strongly) affected by geography. The authors seem to be interpreting this observation as consistent with a signal of a rapid and recent spread of the species. I am concerned that this is not the only demographic scenario explaining the observed pattern of genetic structure, especially if the nature of this spread is not further specified. If the species spread gradually from a center of origin, one would expect to see a pattern of isolation by distance (IBD) and a decrease in genetic diversity from that center of origin. Observed heterozygosities and effective population sizes shown in Supplementary Figure 2 might indicate a center of origin in Northwestern Europe (France, Belgium, Luxembourg, United Kingdom). However, the PCA and pairwise $F_{\mathrm{ST}}$ values in Figure 2b and c do not show an obvious pattern of IBD, and the phylogeny in Figure 2a does not seem to be compatible with such a gradual expansion neither. Moreover, the populations from those countries that appear to be most diverse (as judged by observed heterozygosity and effective population size; see above) also are among those showing the strongest signal of admixture in Figure 2d. These signals of admixture might be an artefact of the ADMIXTURE model being ill-specified for a demographic expansion in continuous space. Yet, the admixture signals might also be true and reflect an alternative scenario of expansion, namely one with multiple, spatially independent colonisation events caused by (anthropogenic?) long-range dispersal events, or a gradual spatial expansion followed by such long-range dispersal events. Overall, it remains unclear to me if the data presented show compelling evidence for a "simple" spatial expansion. The apparent signals of admixture – whether they reflect a more complicated original colonisation process or long-range dispersal after the original spread – are underemphasised in the manuscript and not accounted for in the subsequent analyses (see also my next concern). I suggest the authors provide a more comprehensive explanation of the observed patterns, specifying in more detail what they mean by a rapid and recent spread, and expanding on alternative scenarios.
4. As argued in the preceding point, the manuscript and the analyses currently seem to underrate the extent of apparent admixture among European blackgrass populations, and thus to not fully account for the potentially more complex demographic history and the dynamics of gene flow in their study system. I am concerned about this because gene flow can affect the spread of mutations in space, and thus have consequences on the dynamics of adaptation in a heterogeneous landscape. The theory and simulations employed by the authors to make a case for adaptation from SGV assume a panmictic population. The authors parameterise the theory and the simulations with effective population sizes estimated from the data, which may capture some of the effects of population structure and gene flow on neutral variation. However, the dynamics of selection may be qualitatively and quantitatively different in a situation that to me seems to reflect a metapopulation in a heterogeneous landscape of selection (presence vs. absence of herbicide pressure). For instance, Whitlock and Gomulkiewicz (2005) worked out conditions under which population structure and heterogeneous selection alter the fixation dynamics of de-novo mutations. They found that in a metapopulation with heterogeneous selection and symmetric migration, the fixation probability of de-novo mutations is at least as high as (and sometimes substantially higher than) in a metapopulation with homogeneous selection. This work might provide a good starting point for addressing my concern. The simulations used to suggest that STR in blackgrass reflects a case of adaptation from SGV may need to be extended to a spatial setting for more compelling evidence.
5. I am concerned that the empirical data (patterns of haplotype diversity and structure) and the simulations (isolated population, illustration of evolutionary dynamics conditional on respective scenario) in the way they are currently reported do not provide sufficient evidence that TSR at the ACCase gene is exclusively driven by SGV as opposed to DGV. Even though adaptation from SGV seems plausible, using simulations alone to illustrate that an explanation is plausible is too weak a form of providing evidence for this type of journal. It would be preferable to use a more rigid inferential regime, such as Approximate Bayesian computation or at least a more systematic comparison of simulated and empirical data. What is most urgently missing is a well-defined set of data features / statistics for such a comparison. Haplotype statistics developed to detect and differentiate among hard and soft sweeps might provide a starting point (see e.g. Garud et al. 2015 https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1005004; Garud et al. 2017 https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1009373; and references therein). As of now, the authors present theoretical predictions about the probabilities of sweeps and those from standing genetic variation given a sweep, simulated allele-frequency trajectories *conditional* on either SGV or DGV, and empirical patterns of haplotype diversity, structure, and relationship. To me, this seems like comparing apples to pears to oranges. A concise link among these lines of evidence is not apparent, and thus I am struggling to identify compelling evidence for the adaptation from SGV being the (pre-)dominant mode of evolution. As already argued above, I further suggest that the simulations be extended from a single isolated populations to a metapopulation with spatially heterogeneous selection. Records of past and current herbicide treatments and resistances may help to parameterise such a model.


## Minor comments
**C:** comment; **Q:** question; **S:** suggestion; **R:** request.

### Introduction
- [p.3, last line] "...convergent evolution should be less common than for TSR." **C:** I feel that the authors should expand a bit more on what they mean here to address the audience of this journal. In particular, I suppose that the point here is to say that adaptation from DGV might be more likely for NTSR than for TSR, but I am unsure if a typical reader would make this connection to what "convergent evolution" implies here.
- [p.4, end of 2nd paragraph] "An optimal framework to distinguish between these hypotheses ... simulations." **C:** As outlined in more detailed above, I do not think that simulations on their own are a particularly strong framework to distinguish between hypotheses, unless used in an inferential framework to connect the simulations to empirical findings. Also, the reference to Haller & Messer (2019) given to support the author's claim does not seem to be the most obvious one to me.

### Results and Discussion
- [p.7, last paragraph] **C/Q:** The transition between the second-to last ("An exception...") and the last ("In conclusion, ") sentence in the paragraph felt to abrupt to me. Was the synteny between the blackgrass and barley genomes found here expected? If so, a reference should be given. Otherwise, what lines of evidence to the authors have to rule out that this is a consequence of a misassembly?
- [p.8, end of second paragraph] **C:** As detailed in my major concerns above, the conclusion stated here might be overly simplistic. What type of geographical population structure is there (IBD, gradient of diversity,...)? What mode of gene flow might the signatures of admixture in the data reflect?
- [p.8, last paragraph] **C/S:** I may have missed the information about which populations were under herbicide selection and which ones were not. Perhaps refer the reader to the relevant location. **C:** The authors here argue that there is no genome-wide difference between populations that were selected and those that were not. However, later in the paper, the authors argue that herbicide selection and a population bottleneck associated with such selection might have caused a reduction in effective population size at the targets of selection. Based on this argument, the authors chose the highest empirical genome-wide estimates of the effective population size in their simulations of TSR evolution, and even doubled it in a second set of simulations. To me, there seems to be a contradiction here. If genome-wide effective population size had indeed not been affected by selection, and if selection had only led to a reduction of effective population size at the TSR loci, I do not see a compelling need to perform simulations under an effective population size *higher* than any of the observed ones. Rather, the authors might want to perform a set of simulations under the lowest observed effective population size, too.
- [p.11, second line] **R:** "resistance of" --> "resistance to"
- [p.12, end of fist paragraph] **C/S:** The authors argue that higher read coverage might have increased the statistical power to detect contrasting allelic patterns between the two pools in the bulked-segregant analysis. To me, this argument would seem plausible if most of the true contrasts involved sites at which the frequency of one of the two alleles were very low in at least one of the populations (and irrespective of the effect size of the alleles). Can the authors rule out other potential confounders as causes of the relationship between read coverage and SNP association? One simple way of checking the power hypothesis would seem to be downsampling the read coverage to the minimum read coverage observed.
- [p.14, third-last line of first paragraph] **Q:** Is the reference to Figure 3a–c as intended?
- [p.14, second paragraph] "This pattern of the same TSR mutation appearing independently in separate geographic locations across Europe" **C/S:** I was confused about "appearing independently" here, which to me could mean either independent de-novo mutations after the onset of selection, or evolution from standing variation composed of independent mutations. Please clarify.
- [p.15, first paragraph] **C/Q:** I agree that the population-specific haplotype networks for ACCase show that a majority of the populations harbour more than one haplotype with TSR mutations. In those cases, where the different haplotypes carry the same TSR mutation, this indeed speaks in favour of independent mutations. However, it remains unclear to me if these mutations have occurred in the respective populations exclusively, before the spread of the species, or both. Also, can the authors exclude that mutations have been spread in space by (long-distance) dispersal, potentially assisted by human activities? I feel that population-specific haplotype networks provide insufficient information to answer these questions conclusively.
- [p.15, second paragraph, last line] **C:** Language in "...identification of homozygous Pro197Thr mutations.": To me, "homozygosity" is a property of a genotype, not of a mutation. Please rephrase.
- [p.16, top] **C:** I found the long question at the beginning of the page ("In other words, are ... to act on, or not?") hard to understand. In, particular, it does not become clear under what combinations of mutation rate, selection pressure, and demography one would expect adaptation from SGV as opposed to DGV.  If I correctly interpret Hermisson and Pennings (2015), then adaptation from SGV is likely if either selection is weak, or if selection is strong and the mutation rate is high. Adaptation from DGV is likely if selection is strong and the mutation rate is weak. It would help to formulate the expectations more thoroughly.
- [p.16, second paragraph] "...diversity estimates of $N_e$" **C:** Language is not clear here. It would seem better to say "estimates of $N_e$ based on genetic diversity" or similar.
- [p.17, second paragraph] **C:** It was unclear to me how "a 20 times higher chance of surviving the herbicide treatment..." related to a selection coefficient of 1.0 (cf. e.g. Supplementary Figure 10). Related to this point, it is also unclear what "fitness penalty" in Supplementary Figure 10 exactly means. I suggest the authors are explicit about the model of selection used in the SLiM simulations (i.e. provide a formula of how fitness is parameterised), and that they then specify the parameter values used in their simulations.
- [p.19, middle of first paragraph] **R:** "Large effective population sizes likely result from large census population sizes,..." --> "Large effective population sizes likely *reflect* large census population sizes,..."
- [p.19, middle of second paragraph] **C/Q:** It was not entirely clear to me how the statement in the parentheses ("after 10–15 generations under selection") relates to "a slow initial phase of adaptation". Does this mean that the frequency of a de-novo mutation started to increase more or less deterministically 10 to 15 generations after the mutation arose? Or that it took about 10 to 15 generations in your simulations before a first mutation appeared?
- [p.19, last sentence] **Q:** Are the authors talking about *neutral* mutations here? If so, it would be better to rephrase the sentence, because "TSR allele" to me conflicts with a "neutral allele", just in terms of language.

### Conclusions
- [p.21, first paragraph] **C:** As stated above, I think the possibility of a spread of resistance mutations through (long-distance) dispersal should be taken into account, and, if appropriate, become part of the conclusion.

### Methods
- [p.22, first paragraph] **S:** "We excluded the incidence of known TSR mutations..." --> "We confirmed the absence of known TSR mutations..." (Language)
- [p.23, first paragraph] **S:** "In total, we got approximately..." --> "In total, we *obtained* approximately..."
- [p.23, second paragraph, last sentence] **S:** "...of a Illumina..." --> "...of an Illumina..."; "...paired end mode..." --> "...paired-end mode..."; "...and 150bp read length" --> "...and with a read length of 150bp" (a preposition is missing in front of the read length specification here, but also at other locations: p.23, last sentence; p.28, second paragraph; p.31, second paragraph)
- [p.23, third paragraph, last sentence] **S:** Define "RIN" the first time it appears.
- [p.24, first paragraph] **S:** "We used the same five ... short-read sequencing." --> "We extracted RNA from the same five ... short-read RNA sequencing." **C:** The mixed use of "RIN-scores" (p.23) vs. "RIN Scores" (here) is inconsistent.
- [p.26, middle of first paragraph]: ***Q:* Is "set" the intended verb in the sentence about BUSCO?
- [p.27, second paragraph] **C:** The sentence on the base-shifts in the custom adapters read unclear to me. One sentence later: **Q:** What is meant by "homemade"?
- [p.28, last paragraph] **S:** "..of non usable variants." --> "..of unusable variants."
- [p.29, end of first paragrapgh] **C/Q:** I found the requirement that a variant had to be called in at least 10 populations quite restrictive. Can the authors be sure that this harsh filter did not bias their inference on genetic diversity and population structure? How many variants were excluded by this filter?
- [p.29, third paragraph] **Q:** Did the authors also prune for linkage disequilibrium (LD) – or can it be safely assumed that the ddRADseq SNPs are not in LD?
- [p.30, last paragraph] **C:** The authors here describe the phenotyping related to both the treatment with ACCase as well as ALS, even though results are later shown only for ACCase. I think the parts related to ALS can be removed here. **C:** In the third-to-last line, the parentheses are unnecessary. **C**: It remains unclear how exactly the intermediate scores for the plants' response are delineated (D2, D3, D4, and A5).
- [p.31, first paragraph] **C:** I missed why only the individuals phenotyped with the ACCase inhibitor were selected for the bulked-segregant experiment, but not those treated with the ALS inhibitor.
- [p.32, first paragraph] **Q:** Should there be a space in "contrastfile"?
- [p.34/35] **C:** The sentence split by the page break was not clear to me. Please rephrase.
- [p.35/36] **C/R:** In the description of selection in the simulated model, stating the selection coefficients without also stating the parameterisation of the fitness is not informative. The authors should state the formulae for the fitnesses of the three genotypes, and explicitly refer to the parameters involved when providing numerical values. See also my earlier comment relating to the selection model. This comment relates to both phases in the simulation, i.e. the one prior to and the one after the onset of herbicide selection. Based on the information currently provided, I am uncertain I would not be able to reproduce the simulations in SLiM, even though I know SLiM.
- [p.36, second line of second paragraph]: **S:** Insert after "ACCase locus" the length of the locus in base pairs in parentheses.
- [p.36, last sentence of second paragraph]: **C/S:** I think I know what the authors mean by "...we scaled our models down by a factor of 5.", but to increase the reproducibility of the simulations, I suggest the authors be more explicit about what parameters they scaled how to make the simulations faster.
- [p.36, last paragraph] **C:** It does not seem informative to report dominance coefficients for neutral alleles; they are not meaningful. **Q:** Can the authors justify the ratio of neutral to deleterious mutations simulated in the exons of ACCase? The chosen ratio of 0.25/0.75 seemed arbitrary to me.
- [p.37, first paragraph] "...we assume a fitness of 10% for individuals that do not carry a TSR mutation..." **C/S:** As mentioned before, it is not entirely clear what statements of this kind mean in terms of the model of selection employed by SLiM. The authors should explicitly refer to a model of fitness and the respective parameters.
- [p.37, last paragraph] **C/S:** The first two sentences could be a bit more clear about what was done here. The verb "create" to implied that the authors devised an entirely new model, but my understanding was that they simply ran the same simulations as described before, just without selection. If this is the case, I suggest the authors rephrase the first part of the paragraph to be more specific.

### Figures and Tables
- Fig. 1: **S:** To help with the interpretation of the results shown, I suggest the authors add a schematic phylogeny of the species mentioned in the figure (barley, blackgrass, rice, and rye). **C:** In the caption (and in the Methods text on p.34, last paragraph; p.26, second paragraph) $K_S$ is referred to as a "rate" (synonymous substitution rate). To my knowledge, $K_S$ is defined as "the number of synonymous substitutions per synonymous site" (aka "the synonymous distance"). While it is true that this proportion reflects a rate in the limit of an infinite genome, for conceptual accuracy I propose to avoid "rate" here and instead use the term(s) mentioned above at all relevant positions in the manuscript.
- Fig. 3: **R:** In the last line of the caption, and at other locations in the manuscript, the notation used to represent both the Bonferroni correction of the $p$-value *and* the log-transformation of the corrected $p$-value together looks confusing and non-standard to me. It is confusing to equate the log-transformed significance threshold to $p$, whereas in panel C the $y$ axis reads $-\log_{10}(p)$.
- Table 1: **S:** I found it hard to read the large numbers expressed in base pairs, and thus suggest to represent the quantities in terms of kilo- and/or mega-bases pairs.
- Fig. 5: **S:** This figure seems too complex to me. Panels a) and b) show probabilities of sweeps and are only weakly related to the remaining panels, which show allele-frequency dynamics. I also found it somewhat misleading that panels a) and b) show conditional probabilities of sweeps from SGV, whereas panels c), d), e), and g) do not reflect this conditionality; they show trajectories *given* evolution via SGV or DGV. I thus wonder if panels a) and b) should be separately in another figure. **Q:** In panels c) and d), does one line always reflect exactly one mutation? This was unclear, because the colour of the line depends on the "number of TSR mutations". In other words, for a dark red line (dark red meaning "4 TSR mutations") are there three other lines present? Or does a single dark red line reflect the sum of the frequencies of the 4 TSR mutations? **C:** With respect to the caption: I missed how exactly "the proportions of resistant individuals per field population can be inferred". Please explain this somewhere (I may just have missed it).