{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2580
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0\cname textColor;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf2 From: Benjamin Sibbett <onbehalfof@manuscriptcentral.com>\
Subject: Decision for MER-21-0253, Molecular Ecology Resources\
Date: 12 August 2021 at 12:51:29 CEST\
To: molecol@wiley.com\
Reply-To: Manager.MolEcol@wiley.com\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec3 12-Aug-2021\
\
Dear Reviewer,\
\
A decision of 'Minor Revision' has been rendered for 'Inferring the timing and strength of natural selection and gene migration in the evolution of chicken from ancient DNA data', which you recently reviewed for Molecular Ecology Resources. \'a0The comments of all reviewers and the decision letter are included at the bottom of this email.\
\
Your participation in the peer-review process is critical to the journal's success and directly impacts the quality of the research we publish. \'a0We appreciate your assistance with the evaluation of the manuscript and hope that we may contact you for assistance with future submissions falling within your areas of interest and expertise.\
\
All the best,\
\
Dr. Benjamin Sibbett\
Managing Editor, Molecular Ecology Resources\
Manager.MolEcol@wiley.com\
\
\
Decision letter in full:\
12-Aug-2021\
\
	\
***We recognise that the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic may affect your ability to return your revised manuscript to us within the requested timeframe. If this is the case, please contact manager.molecol@wiley.com to let us know.***\
\
Dear Dr. He:\
\
Your manuscript, 'Inferring the timing and strength of natural selection and gene migration in the evolution of chicken from ancient DNA data', has now been reviewed and assessed by an Editor, and I am happy to inform you that it will be accepted for publication pending satisfactory revision.\
\
To hasten the appearance of your manuscript online, I urge you to complete the following prior to returning your revised manuscript:\
\
1. Ensure data is archived in a publicly-accessible repository. Please see the Data Storage and Documentation section in the author guidelines for details of what data should be archived, appropriate public archives for specific data types and suitable file formats. Exemptions to the data archiving policy may be granted for cases involving sensitive information such as human subject data or the location of endangered species.\
\
2. Complete Data Accessibility statement in your manuscript \'96 include DOIs or accession numbers. Data Accessibility statements will be checked post acceptance but prior to publication for completeness and that information such as DOI or accession numbers are included.\
\
3. Consolidate Supplemental Information into as few files as possible.\
\
** Use the attached Molecular Ecology Resources Supplemental Information Template if possible (not required)\
** If the file is quite long, create a Table of Contents for the first page\
** Make sure the title of the paper and the names of all authors appear on the Supplemental document.\
** Your Supplemental Information will not be copy-edited. \'a0Do not leave in track-changes and other editing marks. \'a0The document will be posted "as is.\'94\
** Save as PDF if possible.\
\
4. Provide your manuscript in an editable format (not PDF!)\
5. Provide tables in an editable format (not images)\
6. Make sure all table and figure captions are present and editable\
\
The title and abstract of your article are very important to increasing its visibility. We encourage you to make your article more discoverable online with the following tips:\
\
https://authorservices.wiley.com/author-resources/Journal-Authors/Prepare/writing-for-seo.html\
\
\
To submit your revised manuscript:\
\
1. Log in to your Scholar One account and click on the 'manuscripts with decisions' link\
2. Click 'create a revision' and follow the on-screen instructions. (Do not upload your revised manuscripts as a new submission.)\
3. Please include a point-by-point response to the reviewer comments, including a detailed list of changes made and a rebuttal to any comments with which you disagree, being as specific as possible in your responses.\
4. Please provide a version of your manuscript with the changes tracked or highlighted.\
5. Your original files will be available to you when you upload your revised manuscript. Please delete any outdated files before completing the submission.\
\
In order to schedule publication efficiently, we impose a deadline of 30 days for the return of revised manuscripts. Manuscripts returned after the deadline may be regarded as new submissions, with a new receipt date, and may be subject to the full peer review process.\
\
Wiley Editing Services Available to All Authors\
Should you be interested, Wiley Editing Services offers expert help with manuscript, language, and format editing, along with other article preparation services. You can learn more about this service option at www.wileyauthors.com/eeo/preparation. You can also check out Wiley\'92s collection of free article preparation resources for general guidance about writing and preparing your manuscript at www.wileyauthors.com/eeo/prepresources.\
\
This journal offers a number of license options for published papers; information about this is available here: https://authorservices.wiley.com/author-resources/Journal-Authors/licensing/index.html. The submitting author has confirmed that all co-authors have the necessary rights to grant in the submission, including in light of each co-author\'92s funder policies. If any author\'92s funder has a policy that restricts which kinds of license they can sign, for example if the funder is a member of Coalition S, please make sure the submitting author is aware.\
\
Thank you for submitting your research to Molecular Ecology Resources.\
\
\
Best Wishes,\
\
Benjamin Sibbett PhD\
Managing Editor, Molecular Ecology Resources\
E-mail: manager.molecol@wiley.com\
\
\
Editor Comments to Author:\
\
First of all, I apologize for the length of time this was in review. In the end we were able to obtain two very thorough reviews, which were uniformly enthusiastic of the manuscript. We all agree that the authors are addressing a very difficult and timely problem in temporal genomics, and that this method is an important advancement in that area. \
\
Both reviewers raise important points that must be addressed prior to publication. First, both reviewers raise concerns about how dominance is treated in the model. Addressing these concerns will require additional simulations prior to publication.\
In addition, both reviewers have questions about the motivation/assumptions behind specification of the model, the sensitivity of the model to specific parameters, and the potential for unexplored areas of the parameter space to confound the model.\
\
Given that many methods are applied to situations that are outside their intended use (and give misleading results), I urge the authors to more clearly delineate scenarios/datasets that are within the situations it has been validated under. As best I can tell, the method assumes an island model or an island-continent model: this is the same assumption that FST outlier tests started with, and that island model assumption led to a lot of false positive results for those tests in more complex demographies. \'a0Thus, I also urge the authors to delineate scenarios that the method may encounter but would be outside the situations it has been validated under or its intended use. \'a0\
\
These suggestions can be addressed in the present manuscript without an increase in length by reducing the parts of the Discussion that are repetitive of the Results.\
\
Dr. Katie Lotterhos\
Subject Editor, Molecular Ecology Resources\
\
\
\
Reviewer Comments to Author:\
\
Reviewer: 1\
\
Comments to the Author\
Please find my comments in the attached PDF.\
\
\
Reviewer: 2\
\
Comments to the Author\
The authors present a method for estimating the timing and strength of selection using temporally-spaced allele frequency data. I think this is a really interesting problem - allele frequencies can change due to the combined effects of drift, selection, and/or migration, and it can be sometimes be difficult to distinguish between these forces. Similar models implemented in the past have ignored drift by assuming an infinite population size and have struggled to incoporate migration. The model described here can incorporate both finite population size and island-continent migration and thus represents a significantly more realistic method for estimating selection. I think the writing style is quite clear overall, and though it was a bit technical for me at points (which is probably a function of my limited knowledge of the math involved) I really enjoyed reading the paper and I think the method looks very promising.\
\
I mainly have some minor requests for clarification regarding several parameters and assumptions of the model. It looks like four parameters (selection coefficient, selection time, migration rate, and migration time) are jointly estimated by the model, and there are a number of other parameters that must be fixed based on prior knowledge or estimated beforehand. I think there also may be some assumptions regarding how parameters can change over time or differ between the island and continent populations that are not made crystal clear. If the authors could clarify some of these assumptions, and perhaps test how violation of some of these assumptions might affect the inferences from the model, it would be very helpful to readers interested in using the model, and it would help to better characterize robustness of the model to violations of its assumptions. I'll go through each parameter separately:\
\
1) Selection coefficient (s): I am pretty sure that selection occurs only on the island, but this is not made completely clear. If selection occurred on the continent too (with either the same or a different coefficient) could this be incorporated into the model? And how would it affect inferences?\
\
2) Timing of selection (ts): Is selection coefficient assumed to be zero before selection begins, with an instantaneous transition to s at ts? I think it might be interesting to consider the robustness of the model other situations, e.g. where the allele under selection is slightly deleterious before selection, or when the selection coefficient gradually increases over time. Also in conjunction with 1) above it would be interesting to consider scenarios where there is selection in both populations but the timing and magnitude of selection differ among the two.\
\
3) Dominance coefficient (h): this I think must be fixed based on prior knowledge. it would be interesting to know how mis-specification of dominance could affect inference.\
\
4) Mutation is only briefly touched upon in the paper - the authors indicate that the model assumes the mutant allele under selection only arose once, and I think I am also making the assumption that this mutation arose before the onsert of selection (and potentially before the onset of simulations?). It's an interesting thought experiment to consider what would happen if mutations occurred during the simulations. If a beneficial mutation arose in the island population at a certain time tmut instead of the selection coefficient for an existing mutation changing at ts, I would think that the model might estimate tmut as ts. But perhaps those two situations could be distinguished because a completely novel mutation would begin at a lower frequency. Also interesting to think of what might happen if the mutation arose in the continent population - in that case the time of onset of migration could be conflated with ts. \
\
5) Is a monogenic trait assumed?\
\
I don't know whether the authors need to address all of these factors in the model or simulations but I think they should at least be addressed in the discussion.\
}