# Review of MS MER-21-0253

In this manuscript, Lyu and co-authors present an approach for jointly inferring the strength and timing of directional selection and gene flow, as well as the underlying allele-frequency trajectory from a time series of allele-frequency estimates. This approach is timely and highly relevant in the current era of accumulating datasets derived from time-referenced ancient DNA samples. Joint inference of the strength and timing of selection and gene flow is key to our understanding of complex evolutionary processes including domestication, local adaptation, and speciation. The Bayesian inference framework that the authors propose extends a series of previous contributions to the field that are based on a hidden Markov model originally proposed by Bollback et al. (2008).
The approach by Lyu et al. is arguably the first one that couples the inference of gene flow to the inference of selection while accounting for genetic drift and still being computationally efficient. Jointly, these additions make the present paper a substantial contribution to the field. The authors apply their approach to a time series of allele-frequency estimates at the Thyroid Stimulating Hormone Receptor in European domestic chicken. This dataset has been analysed in a previous study with a similar approach (Loog et al. 2017). The authors of the present study obtained results largely consistent with those of Loog et al. (2017), which validates their new approach.
The authors performed extensive simulations to assess the robustness of their inference approach to a number of confounding factors, including a mis-specified effective population size, a lack of historical information about the proportion of immigrant alleles, and small and uneven sample sizes over time. The novel approach is shown to overestimate the strength of selection and underestimate the time during which selection acted if the effective population size is assumed too high. Moreover, the authors found that a misspecification of the migration rate can distort the shape of the posterior distribution.
The authors motivate extensions of their approach to more complex models of gene flow than the continent–island model, and to the inference of selection at multiple independent loci. The manuscript is very well written, the notation is appropriate and I did not spot any mistakes in the equations. I had one concern (see below) that can easily be fixed or discussed, and some minor comments. My overall verdict is very positive and I highly recommend the article for publication in MER.

