# Monthly Journal Review December 2021 and January 2022

Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
- [Guerrini et al. (2022) Family secrets: Experiences and outcomes of participating in direct-to-consumer genetic relative-finder services. Am J Hum Genet 109(3):486–497, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.01.013. **adoption; ancestry; direct-to-consumer genetic testing; donor conception; family secrets; misattributed parentage; non-paternity event; relative matching** *Pick*]
- ...

## Genetics
- [Arjun Biddanda, Matthias Steinrücken, John Novembre, Properties of Two-Locus Genealogies and Linkage Disequilibrium in Temporally Structured Samples, Genetics, 2022;, iyac038, https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyac038 **two-locus genealogies, temporal structure, linkage disequilibrium, ancient DNA, population genetics**]
- ...

## PLoS Biol
- [Otte WM, Vinkers CH, Habets PC, van IJzendoorn DGP, Tijdink JK (2022) Analysis of 567,758 randomized controlled trials published over 30 years reveals trends in phrases used to discuss results that do not reach statistical significance. PLOS Biology 20(2): e3001562. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001562 **scientific writing, significance, use of language, perception** *Pick*]
- Lowenberg D, Puebla I (2022) Responsible handling of ethics in data publication. PLOS Biology 20(3): e3001606. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001606 **ethics, data publication, responsibility, integrity, trust in research, diversity, inclusion, data sharing, FAIR principle**

## PNAS
- [PRDM9 losses in vertebrates are coupled to those of paralogs ZCWPW1 and ZCWPW2. Cavassim, Maria Izabel A and Baker, Zachary and Hoge, Carla and Schierup, Mikkel H and Schumer, Molly and Przeworski, Molly. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences March 2022, 119(9) e2114401119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2114401119 **PRDM9 evolution; comparative genomics; genetics; phylogenetics; recombination**]
- ...

## Theor Popul Biol
- Martin Pontz & Reinhard Bürger (2022) The effects of epistasis and linkage on the invasion of locally beneficial mutations and the evolution of genomic islands. Theor. Popul. Biol. 144:49–69, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tpb.2022.01.004 **local adaptation, selection, recombination, invasion probability, gene flow, genetic interactions**

## Picks summary
