# Monthly Journal Review 3 October 2022

Date: 3 October 2022
Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
- Nothing this month

## Genetics
- Estimating the rates of crossover and gene conversion from individual genomes. D. Setter, S. Ebdon, B. Jackson, and K. Lohse. *Genetics* 2022 222 (1), DOI: 10.1093/genetics/iyac100, https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyac100. **crossover; gene conversion; recombination**
- Heterogeneity in viral populations increases the rate of deleterious mutation accumulation. B. Allman, K. Koelle, and D. Weissman. *Genetics* 2022 222 (2), DOI: 10.1093/genetics/iyac127, https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyac127. **Muller's ratchet; agent-based models; deleterious mutations; heterogeneity; virus evolution** *Pick*
- Maintenance of quantitative genetic variance in complex, multitrait phenotypes: the contribution of rare, large effect variants in 2 Drosophila species. E. Hine, D. E. Runcie, S. L. Allen, Y. Wang, S. F. Chenoweth, M. W. Blows, and K. McGuigan. *Genetics* 2022 222 (2), DOI: 10.1093/genetics/iyac122, https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyac122. **Drosophila melanogaster ; Drosophila serrata ; House of Cards; gene expression; genetic covariance; mutation--selection balance; sparse factor analysis; standing genetic variance**

## PLoS Biol
- Forebrain nuclei linked to woodpecker territorial drum displays mirror those that enable vocal learning in songbirds. E. R. Schuppe, L. Cantin, M. Chakraborty, M. T. Biegler, E. R. Jarvis, C.-C. Chen, E. Hara, M. F. Bertelsen, C. C. Witt, E. D. Jarvis, and M. J. Fuxjager. *PLoS Biology* 2022 20 (9):e3001751, DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001751, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001751. **vocal learning, woodpeckers, pallial song nuclei, vocal learning birds, downy wookpeckers, immediate early genes, bill-hammering** *Pick*
- Ghost lineages can invalidate or even reverse findings regarding gene flow. T. Tricou, E. Tannier, and D. M. de Vienne. *PLoS Biology* 2022 20 (9):e3001776, DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001776, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001776. **introgression, endosymbiosis, gene transfer, innovation, horizontal gene flow, phylogenetics, ghost lineages** *Pick*

## PNAS
- Loss-of-function mutation survey revealed that genes with background-dependent fitness are rare and functionally related in yeast. E. Caudal, A. Friedrich, A. Jallet, M. Garin, J. Hou, and J. Schacherer. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (37):e2204206119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2204206119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2204206119. **Saccharomyces cerevisiae; background effect; fitness variability; transposition saturation; yeast**
- Suppressors of fixation can increase average fitness beyond amplifiers of selection. N. Sharma and A. Traulsen. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (37):e2205424119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2205424119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2205424119. **deleterious mutant regime; evolutionary graph theory; low mutation rates; mutation-selection balance**
- Multispecies coexistence in fragmented landscapes. M. Luo, S. Wang, S. Saavedra, D. Ebert, and F. Altermatt. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (37):e2201503119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2201503119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2201503119. **Daphnia species; coexistence criterion; habitat destruction; metacommunity; temperature**
- Pest population dynamics are related to a continental overwintering gradient. D. Lawton, A. S. Huseth, G. G. Kennedy, A. C. Morey, W. D. Hutchison, D. D. Reisig, S. J. Dorman, D. Dillard, R. C. Venette, R. L. Groves, J. J. Adamczyk, I. Barbosa Dos Santos, T. Baute, S. Brown, E. Burkness, A. Dean, G. P. Dively, H. B. Doughty, S. J. Fleischer, J. Green, J. K. Greene, K. Hamilton, E. Hodgson, T. Hunt, D. Kerns, B. R. Leonard, S. Malone, F. Musser, D. Owens, J. C. Palumbo, S. Paula-Moraes, J. A. Peterson, R. Ramirez, S. I. Rondon, T. L. Schilder, A. Seaman, L. Spears, S. D. Stewart, S. Taylor, T. Towles, C. Welty, J. Whalen, R. Wright, and M. Zuefle. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (37):e2203230119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2203230119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2203230119. **bollworm; corn earworm; dispersal; long-term monitoring; migration**
- Increasing crop field size does not consistently exacerbate insect pest problems. J. A. Rosenheim, E. Cluff, M. K. Lippey, B. N. Cass, D. Paredes, S. Parsa, D. S. Karp, and R. Chaplin-Kramer. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (37):e2208813119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2208813119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2208813119. **agroecology; crop yield; field size; pest density; pesticide use**
- Evolutionary divergence of duplicated genomes in newly described allotetraploid cottons. R. Peng, Y. Xu, S. Tian, T. Unver, Z. Liu, Z. Zhou, X. Cai, K. Wang, Y. Wei, Y. Liu, H. Wang, G. Hu, Z. Zhang, C. E. Grover, Y. Hou, Y. Wang, P. Li, T. Wang, Q. Lu, Y. Wang, J. L. Conover, H. Ghazal, Q. Wang, B. Zhang, M. Van Montagu, Y. Van de Peer, J. F. Wendel, and F. Liu. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (39):e2208496119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2208496119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2208496119. **adaptive evolution; polyploid dynamics; structure variations; tetraploid cotton**
- Higher-order epistasis and phenotypic prediction. J. Zhou, M. S. Wong, W.-C. Chen, A. R. Krainer, J. B. Kinney, and D. M. McCandlish. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (39):e2204233119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2204233119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2204233119. **Gaussian processes; genetic interaction; genotype--phenotype map; protein G; splicing**
- Unpredictable repeatability in molecular evolution. S. G. Das and J. Krug. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (39):e2209373119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2209373119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2209373119. **antibiotic resistance; distribution of fitness effects; parallel evolution; predictability of evolution**

## Theor Popul Biol
- Nothing this month


## Picks summary

### Heterogeneity in viral populations increases the rate of deleterious mutation accumulation.
B. Allman, K. Koelle, and D. Weissman. Genetics 2022 222 (2), DOI: 10.1093/genetics/iyac127, https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyac127.

**RNA viruses have high mutation rates**, with the majority of mutations being **deleterious**. We examine patterns of **deleterious mutation accumulation** over multiple rounds of viral replication, with a focus on **how cellular coinfection and heterogeneity in viral output affect these patterns**. Specifically, using agent-based intercellular **simulations** we find, in agreement with previous studies, that **coinfection of cells by viruses relaxes the strength of purifying selection and thereby increases the rate of deleterious mutation accumulation**. We further find that **cellular heterogeneity in viral output exacerbates the rate of deleterious mutation accumulation**, regardless of whether this heterogeneity in viral output is stochastic or is due to variation in the cellular multiplicity of infection. These results highlight the **need to consider the unique life histories of viruses and their population structure to better understand observed patterns of viral evolution**.

### Forebrain nuclei linked to woodpecker territorial drum displays mirror those that enable vocal learning in songbirds. E. R. Schuppe, L. Cantin, M. Chakraborty, M. T. Biegler, E. R. Jarvis, C.-C. Chen, E. Hara, M. F. Bertelsen, C. C. Witt, E. D. Jarvis, and M. J. Fuxjager. *PLoS Biology* 2022 20 (9):e3001751, DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001751, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001751

**Vocal learning is thought to have evolved in 3 orders of birds (songbirds, parrots, and hummingbirds)**, with each showing similar brain regions that have comparable **gene expression specializations relative to the surrounding forebrain motor circuitry**. Here, we searched for signatures of these same gene expression specializations **in previously uncharacterized brains of 7 assumed vocal non-learning bird lineages** across the early branches of the avian family tree. Our findings using a conserved marker for the song system found little evidence of specializations in these taxa, **except for woodpeckers**. Instead, woodpeckers possessed **forebrain regions that were anatomically similar to the pallial song nuclei of vocal learning birds**. **Field studies of free-living downy woodpeckers revealed that these brain nuclei showed increased expression of immediate early genes (IEGs) when males produce their iconic drum displays**, the elaborate bill-hammering behavior that individuals use to compete for territories, much like birdsong. However, these specialized areas did not show increased IEG expression with vocalization or flight. We further confirmed that **other woodpecker species contain these brain nuclei, suggesting that these brain regions are a common feature of the woodpecker brain**. We therefore hypothesize that **ancient forebrain nuclei for refined motor control may have given rise to not only the song control systems of vocal learning birds, but also the drumming system of woodpeckers**.

### Ghost lineages can invalidate or even reverse findings regarding gene flow. T. Tricou, E. Tannier, and D. M. de Vienne. *PLoS Biology* 2022 20 (9):e3001776, DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001776, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001776

Introgression, endosymbiosis, and gene transfer, i.e., **horizontal gene flow (HGF), are primordial sources of innovation in all domains of life**. Our knowledge on HGF relies on detection methods that exploit some of its signatures left on extant genomes. One of them is the **effect of HGF on branch lengths of constructed phylogenies**. This signature has been formalized in statistical tests for HGF detection and used for example to **detect massive adaptive gene flows in malaria vectors** or to order evolutionary events involved in eukaryogenesis. However, these studies rely on the **assumption that ghost lineages (all unsampled extant and extinct taxa) have little influence**. We demonstrate here with **simulations and data reanalysis** that when considering the more realistic condition that **unsampled taxa are legion compared to sampled ones, the conclusion of these studies become unfounded or even reversed**. This illustrates the necessity to recognize the existence of ghosts in evolutionary studies.

