# Monthly Journal Review 5 December 2022

Date: 5 December 2022
Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
- Estimating the genome-wide mutation rate from thousands of unrelated individuals. X. Tian, R. Cai, and S. R. Browning. *American Journal of Human Genetics* 2022 109 (12):2178--2184, DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.10.015, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.10.015. **genome-wide mutation rate; identity by descent** *Pick*
- Systematic comparison of family history and polygenic risk across 24 common diseases. N. Mars, J. V. Lindbohm, P. Della Briotta Parolo, E. Widén, J. Kaprio, A. Palotie, FinnGen, and S. Ripatti. *American Journal of Human Genetics* 2022 109 (12):2152--2162, DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.10.009, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.10.009. **family history; polygenic risk score; risk assessment** *Pick*
- A scoping review of guidelines for the use of race, ethnicity, and ancestry reveals widespread consensus but also points of ongoing disagreement. M. Mauro, D. S. Allen, B. Dauda, S. J. Molina, B. M. Neale, and A. C. F. Lewis. *American Journal of Human Genetics* 2022 109 (12):2110--2125, DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.11.001, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.11.001. **ancestry; ethics; ethnicity; population descriptors; race; recommendations; scoping review** *Pick*
- Addressing the challenges of polygenic scores in human genetic research. J. Novembre, C. Stein, S. Asgari, C. Gonzaga-Jauregui, A. Landstrom, A. Lemke, J. Li, C. Mighton, M. Taylor, and S. Tishkoff. *American Journal of Human Genetics* 2022 109 (12):2095--2100, DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.10.012, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.10.012. **GWAS, polygenic score, polygenic risk score, complex traits, ethics, diverse cohorts, robustness, science communication, guidance** *Pick*

## Genetics
- Spatial structure alters the site frequency spectrum produced by hitchhiking. J. Min, M. Gupta, M. M. Desai, and D. B. Weissman. *Genetics* 2022 222 (3), DOI: 10.1093/genetics/iyac139, https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyac139. **genetic diversity; genetic hitchhiking; selective sweeps; site frequency spectrum; spatial structure**
- Demes: a standard format for demographic models. G. Gower, A. P. Ragsdale, G. Bisschop, R. N. Gutenkunst, M. Hartfield, E. Noskova, S. Schiffels, T. J. Struck, J. Kelleher, and K. R. Thornton. *Genetics* 2022 222 (3), DOI: 10.1093/genetics/iyac131, https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyac131


## PLoS Biol
- The benefits of contributing to the citizen science platform iNaturalist as an identifier. C. T. Callaghan, T. Mesaglio, J. S. Ascher, T. M. Brooks, A. A. Cabras, M. Chandler, W. K. Cornwell, I. Cristóbal Ríos-Málaver, E. Dankowicz, N. Urfi Dhiya'ulhaq, R. A. Fuller, C. Galindo-Leal, F. Grattarola, S. Hewitt, L. Higgins, C. Hitchcock, K.-L. James Hung, T. Iwane, P. Kahumbu, R. Kendrick, S. R. Kieschnick, G. Kunz, C. C. Lee, C.-T. Lin, S. Loarie, M. Norman Medina, M. A. McGrouther, L. Miles, S. Modi, K. Nowak, R. Oktaviani, B. M. Waswala Olewe, J. Pagé, S. Petrovan, C. Saari, C. E. Seltzer, A. P. Seregin, J. J. Sullivan, A. P. Sumanapala, A. Takoukam, J. Widness, K. Willmott, W. Wüster, and A. N. Young. *PLoS Biology* 2022 20 (11):e3001843, DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001843, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001843. **iNaturalist, identifier, biodiversity research**
- Using animations to teach biological processes and principles. P. Kalas and R. J. Redfield. *PLoS Biology* 2022 20 (11):e3001875, DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001875, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001875. **biology, animations, teaching, pedagogy, didactics**

## PNAS
- Selective sweeps in SARS-CoV-2 variant competition. L. Boyle, S. Hletko, J. Huang, J. Lee, G. Pallod, H.-R. Tung, and R. Durrett. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (47):e2213879119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2213879119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2213879119. **covid variant competition; logistic equation; selective sweep** *Pick*
- A global analysis of matches and mismatches between human genetic and linguistic histories. C. Barbieri, D. E. Blasi, E. Arango-Isaza, A. G. Sotiropoulos, H. Hammarström, S. Wichmann, S. J. Greenhill, R. D. Gray, R. Forkel, B. Bickel, and K. K. Shimizu. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (47):e2122084119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2122084119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2122084119. **cultural evolution; languages; molecular anthropology; population genetics**
- Impact of cultural and genetic structure on food choices along the Silk Road. S. Aneli, M. Mezzavilla, E. Bortolini, N. Pirastu, G. Girotto, B. Spedicati, P. Berchialla, P. Gasparini, and L. Pagani. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (47):e2209311119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2209311119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2209311119. **Silk Road; cultural clustering; food culture; genetic structure**
- The evidence remains clear: SARS-CoV-2 emerged via the wildlife trade. R. F. Garry. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (47):e2214427119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2214427119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2214427119. **SARS-CoV-2, wildlife trade, epidemiology, phylogenetics, serology** *Pick*
- Global gradients in the distribution of animal polyploids. K. T. David. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (48):e2214070119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2214070119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2214070119. **biogeography; macroecology; macroevolution; phylogeography; polyploidy**
- Reply to Niebuhr et al.: Infrastructure impacts must always be assessed locally. S. Dunnett, R. A. Holland, G. Taylor, and F. Eigenbrod. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (48):e2214469119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2214469119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2214469119. **renewable energy infrastructure, biodiversity**
- Renewable energy infrastructure impacts biodiversity beyond the area it occupies. B. B. Niebuhr, D. Sant'Ana, M. Panzacchi, B. van Moorter, P. Sandstr\"om, R. G. Morato, and A. Skarin. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (48):e2208815119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2208815119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2208815119. **renewable energy infrastructure, biodiversity, land use**

## Theor Popul Biol
- Nothing this month