# Monthly Journal Review 8 August 2022

Date: 5 September 2022
Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
- Genetic structure correlates with ethnolinguistic diversity in eastern and southern Africa. E. G. Atkinson, S. Dalvie, Y. Pichkar, A. Kalungi, L. Majara, A. Stevenson, T. Abebe, D. Akena, M. Alemayehu, F. K. Ashaba, L. Atwoli, M. Baker, L. B. Chibnik, N. Creanza, M. J. Daly, A. Fekadu, B. Gelaye, S. Gichuru, W. E. Injera, R. James, S. M. Kariuki, G. Kigen, N. Koen, K. C. Koenen, Z. Koenig, E. Kwobah, J. Kyebuzibwa, H. Musinguzi, R. M. Mwema, B. M. Neale, C. P. Newman, C. R. J. C. Newton, L. Ongeri, S. Ramachandran, R. Ramesar, W. Shiferaw, D. J. Stein, R. E. Stroud, S. Teferra, M. T. Yohannes, Z. Zingela, A. R. Martin, and NeuroGAP-Psychosis Study Team. *American Journal of Human Genetics* 2022 109 (9):1667--1679, DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.07.013, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.07.013. **Africa; diverse populations; genotypes; linguistics; population genetics; population structure** *Pick*
- Extent to which array genotyping and imputation with large reference panels approximate deep whole-genome sequencing. S. C. Hanks, L. Forer, S. Schönherr, J. LeFaive, T. Martins, R. Welch, S. A. Gagliano Taliun, D. Braff, J. M. Johnsen, E. E. Kenny, B. A. Konkle, M. Laakso, R. F. J. Loos, S. McCarroll, C. Pato, M. T. Pato, A. V. Smith, NHLBI Trans-Omics for Precision Medicine (TOPMed) Consortium, M. Boehnke, L. J. Scott, and C. Fuchsberger. *American Journal of Human Genetics* 2022 109 (9):1653--1666, DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.07.012, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.07.012. **genotype imputation; genotyping array; whole-genome sequencing**

## Genetics
- Nothing (yet?) this month

## PLoS Biol
- Sleep loss leads to the withdrawal of human helping across individuals, groups, and large-scale societies. E. Ben Simon, R. Vallat, A. Rossi, and M. P. Walker. *PLoS Biology* 2022 20 (8):e3001733, DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001733, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001733. **sleep loss, human behaviour, helping behaviour**

## PNAS
- How to make models more useful. C. M. Barton, A. Lee, M. A. Janssen, S. van der Leeuw, G. E. Tucker, C. Porter, J. Greenberg, L. Swantek, K. Frank, M. Chen, and H. R. A. Jagers. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (35):e2202112119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2202112119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2202112119. **models, science, policy, community standards, reproducibility, best practice, open science, FAIR principle**
- Significant impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on race/ethnic differences in US mortality. J. M. Aburto, A. M. Tilstra, G. Floridi, and J. B. Dowd. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (35):e2205813119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2205813119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2205813119. **COVID-19; demography; life expectancy; lifespan inequality; years of life lost** *Pick*
- A single introduction of wild rabbits triggered the biological invasion of Australia. J. M. Alves, M. Carneiro, J. P. Day, J. J. Welch, J. A. Duckworth, T. E. Cox, M. Letnic, T. Strive, N. Ferrand, and F. M. Jiggins. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (35):e2122734119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2122734119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2122734119. **allele surfing; exome sequencing; invasion biology; population expansion** *Pick*
- Genome-wide analyses of individual differences in quantitatively assessed reading- and language-related skills in up to 34,000 people. E. Eising, N. Mirza-Schreiber, E. L. de Zeeuw, C. A. Wang, D. T. Truong, A. G. Allegrini, C. Y. Shapland, G. Zhu, K. G. Wigg, M. L. Gerritse, B. Molz, G. Alagöz, A. Gialluisi, F. Abbondanza, K. Rimfeld, M. van Donkelaar, Z. Liao, P. R. Jansen, T. F. M. Andlauer, T. C. Bates, M. Bernard, K. Blokland, M. Bonte, A. D. Børglum, T. Bourgeron, D. Brandeis, F. Ceroni, V. Csépe, P. S. Dale, P. F. de Jong, J. C. DeFries, J.-F. Démonet, D. Demontis, Y. Feng, S. D. Gordon, S. L. Guger, M. E. Hayiou-Thomas, J. A. Hernández-Cabrera, J.-J. Hottenga, C. Hulme, J. Kere, E. N. Kerr, T. Koomar, K. Landerl, G. T. Leonard, M. W. Lovett, H. Lyytinen, N. G. Martin, A. Martinelli, U. Maurer, J. J. Michaelson, K. Moll, A. P. Monaco, A. T. Morgan, M. M. Nöthen, Z. Pausova, C. E. Pennell, B. F. Pennington, K. M. Price, V. M. Rajagopal, F. Ramus, L. Richer, N. H. Simpson, S. D. Smith, M. J. Snowling, J. Stein, L. J. Strug, J. B. Talcott, H. Tiemeier, M. P. van der Schroeff, E. Verhoef, K. E. Watkins, M. Wilkinson, M. J. Wright, C. L. Barr, D. I. Boomsma, M. Carreiras, M.-C. J. Franken, J. R. Gruen, M. Luciano, B. Müller-Myhsok, D. F. Newbury, R. K. Olson, S. Paracchini, T. Paus, R. Plomin, S. Reilly, G. Schulte-Körne, J. B. Tomblin, E. van Bergen, A. J. O. Whitehouse, E. G. Willcutt, B. St Pourcain, C. Francks, and S. E. Fisher. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (35):e2202764119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2202764119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2202764119. **genome-wide association study; language; meta-analysis; reading** *Pick*
- A class of identifiable phylogenetic birth-death models. B. Legried and J. Terhorst. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (35):e2119513119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2119513119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2119513119. **birth–death models; identifiability; phylodynamics; phylogenetics** *Pick*

## Theor Popul Biol
- Nothing this month


## Picks summary

