# Monthly Journal Review 8 August 2022

Date: 7 August 2022
Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
- Simultaneous inference of parental admixture proportions and admixture times from unphased local ancestry calls. S. Avadhanam and A. L. Williams. *American Journal of Human Genetics* 2022 109 (8):1405--1420, DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.06.016, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.06.016. **admixture; assortative mating; local ancestry** *Pick*
- A spectrum of recessiveness among Mendelian disease variants in UK Biobank. A. R. Barton, M. L. A. Hujoel, R. E. Mukamel, M. A. Sherman, and P.-R. Loh. *American Journal of Human Genetics* 2022 109 (7):1298--1307, DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.05.008, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.05.008. **Mendelian disease; association study; penetrance; recessive disease**
- Digital health-enabled genomics: Opportunities and challenges. Y. Bombard, G. S. Ginsburg, A. C. Sturm, A. Y. Zhou, and A. A. Lemke. *American Journal of Human Genetics* 2022 109 (7):1190--1198, DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.05.001, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.05.001. **digital health, app, virtual care, electronic medical record, disease diagnosis, disease monitoring, digital genomics decision support, genetic counseling, patient-centered care, genomic medicine, clinical guidellines, regulation**
- Genetic interactions drive heterogeneity in causal variant effect sizes for gene expression and complex traits. R. A. Patel, S. A. Musharoff, J. P. Spence, H. Pimentel, C. Tcheandjieu, H. Mostafavi, N. Sinnott-Armstrong, S. L. Clarke, C. J. Smith, V.A. Million Veteran Program, P. P. Durda, K. D. Taylor, R. Tracy, Y. Liu, W. C. Johnson, F. Aguet, K. G. Ardlie, S. Gabriel, J. Smith, D. A. Nickerson, S. S. Rich, J. I. Rotter, P. S. Tsao, T. L. Assimes, and J. K. Pritchard. *American Journal of Human Genetics* 2022 109 (7):1286--1297, DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.05.014, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.05.014. **complex traits; genetic correlation; genome-wide association; population genetics; statistical genetics** *Pick*
- Rare genetic variants in genes and loci linked to dominant monogenic developmental disorders cause milder related phenotypes in the general population. R. Kingdom, M. Tuke, A. Wood, R. N. Beaumont, T. M. Frayling, M. N. Weedon, and C. F. Wright. *American Journal of Human Genetics* 2022 109 (7):1308--1316, DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.05.011, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.05.011. **biobank; developmental disorders; genomic medicine; penetrance; variant interpretation**

## Genetics
- Population genetics of polymorphism and divergence in rapidly evolving populations. M. J. Melissa, B. H. Good, D. S. Fisher, and M. M. Desai. *Genetics* 2022 221 (4):iyac053, DOI: 10.1093/genetics/iyac053, https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyac053. **clonal interference; evolutionary dynamics; fixation probability; traveling waves** *Pick*
- The impact of genetic modifiers on variation in germline mutation rates within and among human populations. W. R. Milligan, G. Amster, and G. Sella. *Genetics* 2022 221 (4):iyac087, DOI: 10.1093/genetics/iyac087, https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyac087. **germline mutations; human evolution; modifiers; mutation rate; mutation spectra; mutators; pedigree studies; population genetics** *Pick*
- Local fitness and epistatic effects lead to distinct patterns of linkage disequilibrium in protein-coding genes. A. P. Ragsdale. *Genetics* 2022 221 (4), DOI: 10.1093/genetics/iyac097, https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyac097. **diffusion approximation; distribution of fitness effects; epistasis; interference; linkage disequilibrium** *Pick*

## PLoS Biol
- If amyloid drives Alzheimer disease, why have anti-amyloid therapies not yet slowed cognitive decline?. C. Haass and D. Selkoe. *PLoS Biology* 2022 20 (7):e3001694, DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001694, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001694. **Alzheimer's disease, amyloid, anti-amyloid therapy, disease modification, clinical trial, intravenous antibodies**

## PNAS
### Special Feature: Celebrating the 200th Anniversary of the Birth of Gregor Johann Mendel
- Three problems in the genetics of speciation by selection. D. Schluter and L. H. Rieseberg. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (30):e2122153119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2122153119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2122153119. **genetics; natural selection; recombination; speciation; standing genetic variation** *Pick*
- Genetics of adaptation. K. Bomblies and C. L. Peichel. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (30):e2122152119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2122152119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2122152119. **adaptation; evolution; evolutionary biochemistry; genetics; population genetics** *Pick*
- Molecular genetic variation of animals and plants under domestication. L. Andersson and M. Purugganan. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (30):e2122150119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2122150119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2122150119. **Mendel; crops; domestic animals; domestication; genetics** *Pick*
- The "New Synthesis". N. H. Barton. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (30):e2122147119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2122147119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2122147119. **infinitesimal model; polygenic adaptation; quantitative genetics** *Pick*
- Mendel and Darwin. A. Berry and J. Browne. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (30):e2122144119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2122144119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2122144119. **Darwin; Mendel; evolution** *Pick*
- Gregor Johann Mendel: From peasant to priest, pedagogue, and prelate. D. L. Hartl. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (30):e2121953119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2121953119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2121953119. **Cyrill Napp; Gregor Mendel; Monastery of St. Thomas (Brno); heredity; selective breeding**
- Gregor Johann Mendel and the development of modern evolutionary biology. N. C. Stenseth, L. Andersson, and H. E. Hoekstra. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (30):e2201327119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2201327119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2201327119. **Gregor Johann Mendel, inheritance, special feature, evolutionary biology, variation in fitness, inheritance of fitness traits, differential reproductive success, Mendelian inheritance, dominance, segregation, independent assortment, Darwin's black box** *Pick*

### Other articles
- An enhancer of Agouti contributes to parallel evolution of cryptically colored beach mice. T. B. Wooldridge, A. F. Kautt, J.-M. Lassance, S. McFadden, V. S. Domingues, R. Mallarino, and H. E. Hoekstra. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (27):e2202862119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2202862119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2202862119. **adaptation; camouflage; convergence; deer mice; pigmentation** *Pick*
- Uncovering the enigmatic evolution of bears in greater depth: The hybrid origin of the Asiatic black bear. T. Zou, W. Kuang, T. Yin, L. Frantz, C. Zhang, J. Liu, H. Wu, and L. Yu. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (31):e2120307119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2120307119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2120307119. **Asiatic black bear; Ursinae; hybridization; population genomics, hybrid speciation**
- Genetic architecture of dispersal and local adaptation drives accelerating range expansions. J. N. Deshpande and E. A. Fronhofer. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (31):e2121858119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2121858119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2121858119. **biological invasion; environmental gradient; evolvability; gene-regulatory network; robustness**
- Improving GWAS discovery and genomic prediction accuracy in biobank data. E. J. Orliac, D. Trejo Banos, S. E. Ojavee, K. Läll, R. M\"agi, P. M. Visscher, and M. R. Robinson. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (31):e2121279119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2121279119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2121279119. **Bayesian penalized regression; association study; genomic prediction**
- Ancient variation of the AvrPm17 gene in powdery mildew limits the effectiveness of the introgressed rye Pm17 resistance gene in wheat. M. C. Müller, L. Kunz, S. Schudel, A. W. Lawson, S. Kammerecker, J. Isaksson, M. Wyler, J. Graf, A. G. Sotiropoulos, C. R. Praz, B. Manser, T. Wicker, S. Bourras, and B. Keller. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (30):e2108808119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2108808119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2108808119. **avirulence gene; gene conversion; powdery mildew; resistance introgression; wheat** *Pick*
- Assortative mating enhances postzygotic barriers to gene flow via ancestry bundling. P. Muralidhar, G. Coop, and C. Veller. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (30):e2122179119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2122179119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2122179119. **assortative mating; introgression; mate choice; sexual selection; speciation** *Pick*
- Middle Jurassic fossils document an early stage in salamander evolution. M. E. H. Jones, R. B. J. Benson, P. Skutschas, L. Hill, E. Panciroli, A. D. Schmitt, S. A. Walsh, and S. E. Evans. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (30):e2114100119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2114100119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2114100119. **Jurassic; amphibians; evolution; phylogeny; salamander**
- A general theory for temperature dependence in biology. J. I. Arroyo, B. Déez, C. P. Kempes, G. B. West, and P. A. Marquet. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (30):e2119872119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2119872119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2119872119. **metabolic theory; scaling; temperature kinetics**
- Wolf attacks predict far-right voting. B. Clemm von Hohenberg and A. Hager. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (30):e2202224119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2202224119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2202224119. **Canis lupus; environmental conservation; human--wildlife relations; political behavior; radical-right voting** *Pick*
- Pervasive alterations to snow-dominated ecosystem functions under climate change. W. R. Wieder, D. Kennedy, F. Lehner, K. N. Musselman, K. B. Rodgers, N. Rosenbloom, I. R. Simpson, and R. Yamaguchi. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (30):e2202393119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2202393119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2202393119. **climate change; ecohydrology; internal variability; large ensemble; water resources**

## Theor Popul Biol
- Adaptive meiotic drive in selfing populations with heterozygote advantage. E. Brud. *Theoretical Population Biology* 2022 146:61--70, DOI: 10.1016/j.tpb.2022.06.001, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tpb.2022.06.001. **Mating system; Modifier theory; Overdominance; Segregation distortion**
- Joint effect of changing selection and demography on the site frequency spectrum. K. Jain and S. Kaushik. *Theoretical Population Biology* 2022 146:46--60, DOI: 10.1016/j.tpb.2022.07.001, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tpb.2022.07.001. **Changing environment; Effective population size; Heterozygosity; Site frequency spectrum**
- Solving multispecies population games in continuous space and time. E. F. Fr\olich and U. H. Thygesen. *Theoretical Population Biology* 2022 146:36--045, DOI: 10.1016/j.tpb.2022.06.002, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tpb.2022.06.002. **Game theory; Habitat choice; Population dynamics; Predator–prey; Vertical migration**

## Picks summary

