# Monthly Journal Review 7 November 2022

Date: 7 November 2022
Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
- The construction of cross-population polygenic risk scores using transfer learning. Z. Zhao, L. G. Fritsche, J. A. Smith, B. Mukherjee, and S. Lee. *American Journal of Human Genetics* 2022 109 (11):1998--2008, DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.09.010, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.09.010. **BioBank Japan; PRS; UK Biobank; cross population; summary statistics; transfer learning; machine learning; gradient descent**
- Liability-scale heritability estimation for biobank studies of low-prevalence disease. S. E. Ojavee, Z. Kutalik, and M. R. Robinson. *American Journal of Human Genetics* 2022 109 (11):2009--2017, DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.09.011, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.09.011. **GWAS; biobanks; liability-scale heritability**
- A founder event causing a dominant childhood epilepsy survives 800 years through weak selective pressure. B. E. Grinton, E. Robertson, L. G. Fearnley, I. E. Scheffer, A. G. Marson, T. J. O'Brien, W. O. Pickrell, M. I. Rees, S. M. Sisodiya, D. J. Balding, M. F. Bennett, M. Bahlo, S. F. Berkovic, and K. L. Oliver. *American Journal of Human Genetics* 2022 109 (11):2080--2087, DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.10.004, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.10.004. **autosomal dominant; childhood-onset disease; epilepsy; founder event; genetics; haplotypes** *Pick*

## Genetics
- Nothing this month


## PLoS Biol
- Conflict over fertilization underlies the transient evolution of reinforcement. C. A. Rushworth, A. M. Wardlaw, J. Ross-Ibarra, and Y. Brandvain. *PLoS Biology* 2022 20 (10):e3001814, DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001814, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001814. **secondary contact, reinforcement, prezygotic isolation, coordination problem, recombination, costs of hybridisation, postmating prezygotic incompatibility, interspecific conflict over reinforcement, gametophytic factors, Zea mays, maize, transient evolution, sexual conflict** *Pick*

## PNAS
- Climate change and the threat to civilization. D. Steel, C. T. DesRoches, and K. Mintz-Woo. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (42):e2210525119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2210525119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2210525119. **climate change, civilisation**
- Large-effect loci mediate rapid adaptation of salmon body size after river regulation. A. J. Jensen, I. J. Hagen, Y. Czorlich, G. H. Bolstad, G. Bremset, B. Finstad, K. Hindar, Ø. Skaala, and S. Karlsson. *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America* 2022 119 (44):e2207634119, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2207634119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2207634119. **adaptation; evolution; large-effect loci; six6; vgll3** *Pick*

- Special Feature on "Sleep, Brain, and Cognition" with papers on
    - the functions of sleep,
    - the bioregulation of napping in early childhood,
    - the role of sleep in improving and consolidating memory,
    - dreaming,
    - the effect of sleep deprivation on learning,
    - and more (see https://www.pnas.org/toc/pnas/119/44).

## Theor Popul Biol
- Nothing this month

## Picks summary

