# Monthly Journal Review December 2021 and January 2022

Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
- Fan et al. (2022) A genealogical estimate of genetic relationships. Am J Human Genet online first, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.03.016. **ancestral recombination graph, genetic relationship matrix, population structure** *Pick*

## Genetics
- Nothing this month

## PLoS Biol
- Lowenberg D, Puebla I (2022) Responsible handling of ethics in data publication. PLOS Biology 20(3): e3001606. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001606 **ethics, data publication, responsibility, integrity, trust in research, diversity, inclusion, data sharing, FAIR principle**
- Smith JA, Sandbrink JB (2022) Biosecurity in an age of open science. PLOS Biology 20(4): e3001600. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001600 **biosecurity, open science, biosafety, risk mitigation, open data, enhanced pathogens, viral engineering, responsible research**
- Rohwer VG, Rohwer Y, Dillman CB (2022) Declining growth of natural history collections fails future generations. PLOS Biology 20(4): e3001613. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001613 **natural history collections, environmental change** *Pick*

## PNAS
- Callier (2022) Machine learning in evolutionary studies comes of age. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119 (17) e2205058119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2205058119. **machine learning, evolutionary biology, population genomics, human evolution, ancestry inference** *Pick*
- Brand et al. (2022) Estimating bonobo (*Pan paniscus*) and chimpanzee (*Pan troglodytes*) evolutionary history from nucleotide site patterns. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119 (17) e2200858119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2200858119. **Congo River; admixture; demography; introgression; male reproductive skew**
- Spottiswoode et al. (2022) Genetic architecture facilitates then constrains adaptation in a host–parasite coevolutionary arms race. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119 (17) e2121752119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2121752119 **host-specific adaptation, mimicry of egg coloration, maternal inheritance, genetic architecture, evolutionary constraint, recombination, heterozygosity, arms race, W chromosome, coevolution** *Pick*
- Andrades Valtueña et al. (2022) Stone Age *Yersinia pestis* genomes shed light on the early evolution, diversity, and ecology of plague. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119 (17) e2116722119,  https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2116722119. **Yersinia pestis; ancient DNA; plague** *Pick*
- Lopez-Valdivia et al. (2022) Gradual domestication of root traits in the earliest maize from Tehuacán. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119 (17) e2110245119 | https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2110245119. **domestication; laser ablation; maize; root anatomy; teosinte**

## Theor Popul Biol
- Martin Pontz & Reinhard Bürger (2022) The effects of epistasis and linkage on the invasion of locally beneficial mutations and the evolution of genomic islands. Theor. Popul. Biol. 144:49–69, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tpb.2022.01.004 **local adaptation, selection, recombination, invasion probability, gene flow, genetic interactions**

## Picks summary

### Fan et al. (2022) AJHG A genealogical estimate of genetic relationships
The application of genetic relationships among individuals, characterized by a genetic relationship matrix (GRM), has far-reaching effects in human genetics. However, the current standard to calculate the GRM treats linked markers as independent and does not explicitly model the underlying genealogical history of the study sample. Here, we propose a coalescent-informed framework, namely the expected GRM (eGRM), to infer the expected relatedness between pairs of individuals given an ancestral recombination graph (ARG) of the sample. Through extensive simulations, we show that the eGRM is an unbiased estimate of latent pairwise genome-wide relatedness and is robust when computed with ARG inferred from incomplete genetic data. As a result, the eGRM better captures the structure of a population than the canonical GRM, even when using the same genetic information. More importantly, our framework allows a principled approach to estimate the eGRM at different time depths of the ARG, thereby revealing the time-varying nature of population structure in a sample. When applied to SNP array genotypes from a population sample from Northern and Eastern Finland, we find that clustering analysis with the eGRM reveals population structure driven by subpopulations that would not be apparent via the canonical GRM and that temporally the population model is consistent with recent divergence and expansion. Taken together, our proposed eGRM provides a robust tree-centric estimate of relatedness with wide application to genetic studies.

### Rohwer et al. (2022) PLoS Biology Declining growth of natural history collections fails future generations
New additions of vertebrate specimens to natural history collections are declining in the midst of widespread and accelerating environmental change. Reversing these trends in collecting efforts is essential for addressing future unforeseen ecological issues.

When the explorer and ornithologist Rollo Beck collected a series of seabird specimens in 1907, he never would have imaged that, a century later, researchers would rely on his specimens to answer critical questions about ecosystem change [1,2]. Who could have imagined that peregrine falcon egg sets would reveal the harmful effects of the insecticide DDT [3], that amphibian specimens from throughout the Americas would inform our understanding of virulent forms of chytrid fungus [4], or that bird and mammal collections would illuminate unanticipated consequences of climate change [5]? Natural history collections help solve conservation problems and answer unforeseen questions that simply could not have been asked about natural systems when those specimens were collected.
[...]

Main reasons:
- institutional
- ethical

The decline in collecting is also ethically problematic. Because scientific collecting is typically justified by the knowledge gained from specimens, this ethical justification should also extend to existing specimens and to the knowledge that is lost by failing to collect new specimens. Declines in collecting create unfillable gaps in one of our longest running data sets about natural systems, which erodes the value of existing collections for future discovery and compromises the ethical justification for both current and past collecting.

The question that remains to be addressed is whether this trend can be reversed. Growth of collections can come in many ways. University-based museums that train future curators should have active collecting programs that teach researchers how to use collections and how active research programs can complement and guide the growth of collections. Growing nontraditional collections of specimen attributes (such as extended wings and syrinxes in birds, nests, or specimens at different developmental stages) provides novel specimen types while building scientifically useful collections. For some taxa, developing coordinated salvage networks across museums, government agencies, nongovernmental organizations, and other relevant parties offer promising ways to build collections, especially of species only obtainable through salvage because of rarity. Developing capacity locally and abroad will deepen our understanding of less studied taxa and areas, and these discoveries that should be led by local researchers.

We also have to continue the ethical conversation. We should not dismiss the concerns of individuals about collecting, but we need to be clear about the knowledge gained from natural history collections and how this knowledge is essential to so many scientific disciplines. If we, as a scientific community, value understanding changes in populations and ecosystems through time and the accumulation of scientific knowledge, then scientific collecting should continue. If the declines in collecting continue, the legacy we leave future generations will be an unfillable gap in the longest tangible record of life on earth, created precisely in the midst of widespread and dramatic environmental change. Is this a risk we are willing to take?

### Callier (2022) PNAS (Inner Workings) Machine learning in evolutionary studies comes of age
Whether flowers, mosquitoes, or humans, all organisms tend to interact and reproduce with others of their ilk who are close by. In principle, that means that their genetics can reveal not only their ancestry but also their geography. Taking advantage of this simple insight, evolutionary geneticists recently showed that it was possible to create models, based on scanning thousands of genomes from mosquitoes to elephants to humans (Fig. 1), that match individual genomes to spatial locations and therefore predict where a given individual animal was born (1, 2). The approach has practical import: It could be applied in the context of ecology and conservation by, for example, tracing the origins of elephant tusks and rare woods. It’s one of a variety of new machine learning methods that are finding applications in the field, shedding light on longstanding questions about the forces that shape genomes, such as selection and genetic drift. These approaches have already demonstrated the potential to deal with the messiness of real data in ways that formal population genetic theory cannot. In the early 2000s, researchers who were “thinking a little bit ahead,” says evolutionary geneticist Andrew Kern at the University of Oregon in Eugene, “saw that there was going to be this collision happening, where we have this giant corpus of mathematical theory, and all of a sudden reality was going to intrude on our models in the form of all the genomic data that we’re about to collect.” What the field needed, he adds, were “more ways to bridge that gap between theory and biology.” Evolutionary biologists are starting to do exactly that.

[...]

“The classic population genetic approaches for detecting selection can be quite underpowered,” explains David Enard, a population geneticist at the University of Arizona, Tucson, who studies how the selection pressure from ancient epidemics, occurring 20,000 to 50,000 years ago, shaped human genomes (7, 8). Machine learning approaches allow researchers to detect events farther back in time, picking up subtle signals that wouldn’t be captured by conventional methods, he says. Enard is now using these approaches to reanalyze data studied via conventional methods, trying to detect more subtle signals of selection from ancient viruses on human genomes, signals that he may have missed.
Ultimately, these new approaches should help inform longstanding debates about the various forces, such as drift or selection, that have shaped real human genomes. “There’s still a lot that we need to do as a field to bring all of these evolutionary forces together,” says Brown University (Providence, RI) population geneticist Sohini Ramachandran, “to understand what has truly shaped our genomes.”

### Spottiswoode et al. (2022) PNAS Genetic architecture facilitates then constrains adaptation in a host–parasite coevolutionary arms race
Significance
Validating an almost century-old hypothesis, we show that a critical host-specific adaptation in a brood-parasitic bird, mimicry of host egg coloration, is maternally inherited, allowing mothers to transmit specialized mimicry to their daughters irrespective of the father’s host species. This genetic architecture, however, is a double-edged sword for parasites: the loss of recombination and heterozygosity as sources of evolutionary novelty likely constrains the parasite from mimicking the full range of color polymorphisms that hosts have evolved as an escalated defense against parasitism. This important tradeoff of asexual inheritance may have relevance for understanding coevolution in other host–parasite systems.

Abstract
In coevolutionary arms races, interacting species impose selection on each other, generating reciprocal adaptations and counter adaptations. This process is typically enhanced by genetic recombination and heterozygosity, but these sources of evolutionary novelty may be secondarily lost when uniparental inheritance evolves to ensure the integrity of sex-linked adaptations. We demonstrate that host-specific egg mimicry in the African cuckoo finch Anomalospiza imberbis is maternally inherited, confirming the validity of an almost century-old hypothesis. We further show that maternal inheritance not only underpins the mimicry of different host species but also additional mimetic diversification that approximates the range of polymorphic egg “signatures” that have evolved within host species as an escalated defense against parasitism. Thus, maternal inheritance has enabled the evolution and maintenance of nested levels of mimetic specialization in a single parasitic species. However, maternal inheritance and the lack of sexual recombination likely disadvantage cuckoo finches by stifling further adaptation in the ongoing arms races with their individual hosts, which we show have retained biparental inheritance of egg phenotypes. The inability to generate novel genetic combinations likely prevents cuckoo finches from mimicking certain host phenotypes that are currently favored by selection (e.g., the olive-green colored eggs laid by some tawny-flanked prinia, Prinia subflava, females). This illustrates an important cost of coding coevolved adaptations on the nonrecombining sex chromosome, which may impede further coevolutionary change by effectively reversing the advantages of sexual reproduction in antagonistic coevolution proposed by the Red Queen hypothesis.

### Andrades Valtueña et al. (2022) PNAS Stone Age *Yersinia pestis* genomes shed light on the early evolution, diversity, and ecology of plague
Significance
The bacterium Yersinia pestis has caused numerous historically documented outbreaks of plague and research using ancient DNA could demonstrate that it already affected human populations during the Neolithic. However, the pathogen’s genetic diversity, geographic spread, and transmission dynamics during this early period of Y. pestis evolution are largely unexplored. Here, we describe a set of ancient plague genomes up to 5,000 y old from across Eurasia. Our data demonstrate that two genetically distinct forms of Y. pestis evolved in parallel and were both distributed across vast geographic distances, potentially occupying different ecological niches. Interpreted within the archeological context, our results suggest that the spread of plague during this period was linked to increased human mobility and intensification of animal husbandry.

Abstract
The bacterial pathogen Yersinia pestis gave rise to devastating outbreaks throughout human history, and ancient DNA evidence has shown it afflicted human populations as far back as the Neolithic. Y. pestis genomes recovered from the Eurasian Late Neolithic/Early Bronze Age (LNBA) period have uncovered key evolutionary steps that led to its emergence from a Yersinia pseudotuberculosis-like progenitor; however, the number of reconstructed LNBA genomes are too few to explore its diversity during this critical period of development. Here, we present 17 Y. pestis genomes dating to 5,000 to 2,500 y BP from a wide geographic expanse across Eurasia. This increased dataset enabled us to explore correlations between temporal, geographical, and genetic distance. Our results suggest a nonflea-adapted and potentially extinct single lineage that persisted over millennia without significant parallel diversification, accompanied by rapid dispersal across continents throughout this period, a trend not observed in other pathogens for which ancient genomes are available. A stepwise pattern of gene loss provides further clues on its early evolution and potential adaptation. We also discover the presence of the flea-adapted form of Y. pestis in Bronze Age Iberia, previously only identified in in the Caucasus and the Volga regions, suggesting a much wider geographic spread of this form of Y. pestis. Together, these data reveal the dynamic nature of plague’s formative years in terms of its early evolution and ecology.

## Christine
Evol. Applic.
- Kuvier's gazelle and genome sequencing: comparison of captive and wild populations. Captive breeding did not lead to loss in genetic diversity. Surprisingly no mentioning of purging.
- Domestication paper in Evol. Applic. issue on agriculture and breeding (Thomas and Simon)
- Rainbow trout conversation
- Population size matters for the mutation rate in bacteria
- Epigenetic and sleep in marmots 

Not covering eLife right now.

## Domi
- See Slack channel
- Phil. Trans. B: Take note of the "Theme Issue", this time on Lewontin's point about uniformity of genomes among human individuals and his argument about the lack of justification for human races. Interesting articles: covariance of correlations under multi-species coalescent.

## Mathieu
Bioinformatics
- bwa meme: New mapping algorithm that incorporates deep learning. Uses less memory.

Conservation Genetics
- Review by Segelbacher and Putsan on strategies in genomics for management. Bridging gap between theory and practice.
- Museum DNA enrichment (punctured hybrid capture sequencing).

## Thomas

- Species-level phylogeny in the genus Solanum. Nine genomic regions analysed. Phylogenetic stability by large, but three major polytomies due to ILS and rapid selection.

3G
- Large deletion affecting butterfly wing patterning
- Peter Beerli et al.: Population divergence time estimation using individual label switching. Identification of models without gene flow works well, but with migration, delineation of models becomes difficult.

PLoS Comput Biol
- Mahmudi et al.: Bayesian inference of ARGS. Novel algorithm of probabilistic inference of the ARG. More accurate inference. 

## José
Nature Genetics
- Comparison of East-Asian ancestry in humans (?) and 3D images of faces. Evidence for selection on the morphology of the nose.

Science Advances
- Investigation of genetic diversity in dingo, domesticated dogs, and the wolf. The dingo is strongly separated from ???
- Adaptation of coral reefs to climate change. Comparison of populations in different parts of lagoones. Response at the level of colonies.

## Laura
American Naturalist
- Nachman and a co-author: Bergman's and Allen's rule in house mice. Genetic and environmental contributions. Brazil and New York mice. Measured ear length and tail length and body mass under cold and hot conditions. Similar heritabilities in both groups. Extremity size should significant plasticity.

Christine:
- Lab meeting schedule: two people no longer in our lab. Next week's slot is free, and away next week.
- Decision: Domi will add slots to the lab meeting schedule
- Suggestion to revise the list of journal. Domi offered to update the list every semester.