# Monthly Journal Review December 2021 and January 2022

Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
- Evolving use of ancestry, ethnicity, and race in genetics research — A survey spanning seven decades. Byeon, Yen Ji Julia et al. (2021) The American Journal of Human Genetics, Volume 108, Issue 12, 2215-2223, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2021.10.008 **ancestry, ethnicity, race, racism, population, descriptors**
- Portability of 245 polygenic scores when derived from the UK Biobank and applied to 9 ancestry groups from the same cohort. Privé, Florian et al. (2022) The American Journal of Human Genetics, Volume 109, Issue 1, 12-23, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2021.11.008 **ancestry; polygenic scores; portability** *Pick*
- Overcoming constraints on the detection of recessive selection in human genes from population frequency data. Balick, Daniel J. et al. (2022) The American Journal of Human Genetics, Volume 109, Issue 1, 33-49 **constraint scores; genetic dominance; inference of selection; mode of inheritance; population genetics; recessive human genes; recessive selection; site frequency spectrum**
- 

## Genetics
- Sam Yeaman, Evolution of polygenic traits under global vs local adaptation, Genetics, Volume 220, Issue 1, January 2022, iyab134, https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyab134 **polygenic traits, review, global adaptation, local adaptation, genetic architecture**
- Kimberly J Gilbert, Stefan Zdraljevic, Daniel E Cook, Asher D Cutter, Erik C Andersen, Charles F Baer, The distribution of mutational effects on fitness in Caenorhabditis elegans inferred from standing genetic variation, Genetics, Volume 220, Issue 1, January 2022, iyab166, https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyab166 **distribution of fitness effects; linked selection; mutation; self-fertilization; site frequency spectrum** *Pick*
- Takahiro Sakamoto, Hideki Innan, Muller’s ratchet of the Y chromosome with gene conversion, Genetics, Volume 220, Issue 1, January 2022, iyab204, https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyab204 **Muller’s ratchet; Y chromosome; gene conversion; population genetics**
- Jobran Chebib, Frédéric Guillaume, The relative impact of evolving pleiotropy and mutational correlation on trait divergence, Genetics, Volume 220, Issue 1, January 2022, iyab205, https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyab205 **correlated mutation; correlational selection; genetic architecture; genetic constraints; metamerism; modularity; mutation; pleiotropy; subfunctionalization; trait divergence** *Pick*
- Mehreen R Mughal, Michael DeGiorgio, Properties and unbiased estimation of F- and D-statistics in samples containing related and inbred individuals, Genetics, Volume 220, Issue 1, January 2022, iyab090, https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyab090 **inbreeding, relatedness, introgression, demography, population genetics, gene flow** *Pick*
- Piter Bijma, Andries D Hulst, Mart C M de Jong, The quantitative genetics of the prevalence of infectious diseases: hidden genetic variation due to indirect genetic effects dominates heritable variation and response to selection, Genetics, Volume 220, Issue 1, January 2022, iyab141, https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyab141 **quantitative genetics, infectious diseases, response to selection, indirect genetic effects, disease transmission, artificial selection, breeding programs, R0**


## PLoS Biol
- Day T, Kennedy DA, Read AF, McAdams D (2021) The economics of managing evolution. PLOS Biology 19(11): e3001409. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001409 **human impact, spread of resistance, pesticide resistance, antibiotic resistance, management strategies, decision making, Nash equilibrium, regulatory interventions, fish farming, Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) crops**
- Castiglione GM, Zhou L, Xu Z, Neiman Z, Hung CF, et al. (2021) Evolutionary pathways to SARS-CoV-2 resistance are opened and closed by epistasis acting on ACE2. PLOS Biology 19(12): e3001510. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001510 **SARS-CoV-2, angiosperm converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), resistance, mouse, humans, epistasis**


## PNAS
- Quinoa, potatoes, and llamas fueled emergent social complexity in the Lake Titicaca Basin of the Andes. Melanie J. Miller, Iain Kendall, José M. Capriles, Maria C. Bruno, Richard P. Evershed, Christine A. Hastorf. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences Dec 2021, 118 (49) e2113395118; DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2113395118 **agropastoralism; amino acids; dietary reconstruction; stable isotopes; subsistence resilience**
- Metapopulations with habitat modification. Zachary R. Miller, Stefano Allesina. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences Dec 2021, 118 (49) e2109896118; DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2109896118 **ecosystem engineering; legacy effects; metapopulations; plant–soil feedbacks; strain competition**
- Genomic evidence for inbreeding depression and purging of deleterious genetic variation in Indian tigers. Anubhab Khan, Kaushalkumar Patel, Harsh Shukla, Ashwin Viswanathan, Tom van der Valk, Udayan Borthakur, Parag Nigam, Arun Zachariah, Yadavendradev V. Jhala, Marty Kardos, Uma Ramakrishnan. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences Dec 2021, 118 (49) e2023018118; DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2023018118 **conservation genomics; large carnivore; natural selection; purifying selection; small population size** *Pick*
- Discovery of an ancient MHC category with both class I and class II features. Kazuhiko Okamura, Johannes M. Dijkstra, Kentaro Tsukamoto, Unni Grimholt, Geert F. Wiegertjes, Akiko Kondow, Hisateru Yamaguchi, Keiichiro Hashimoto. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences Dec 2021, 118 (51) e2108104118; DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2108104118 **MHC class I; MHC class II; MHC class divergence; major histocompatibility complex; molecular evolution**
- Twitter manipulates your feed: Ethical considerations. Susan T. Fiske. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences Jan 2022, 119 (1) e2119924119; DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2119924119 **Twitter, democracy, research on media, reasearch ethics, business ethicx, manipulation, users knowledge**


## Theor Popul Biol
- Nothing this month.

## Picks summary

### Pivé et al. (2022) Am. J. Hum. Genet.
The low portability of polygenic scores (PGSs) across global populations is a major concern that must be addressed before PGSs can be used for everyone in the clinic. Indeed, prediction accuracy has been shown to decay as a function of the genetic distance between the training and test cohorts. However, such cohorts differ not only in their genetic distance but also in their geographical distance and their data collection and assaying, conflating multiple factors. In this study, we examine the extent to which PGSs are transferable between ancestries by deriving polygenic scores for 245 curated traits from the UK Biobank data and applying them in nine ancestry groups from the same cohort. By restricting both training and testing to the UK Biobank data, we reduce the risk of environmental and genotyping confounding from using different cohorts. We define the nine ancestry groups at a sub-continental level, based on a simple, robust, and effective method that we introduce here. We then apply two different predictive methods to derive polygenic scores for all 245 phenotypes and show a systematic and dramatic reduction in portability of PGSs trained using Northwestern European individuals and applied to nine ancestry groups. These analyses demonstrate that prediction already drops off within European ancestries and reduces globally in proportion to genetic distance. Altogether, our study provides unique and robust insights into the PGS portability problem.

### Balick et al. (2022) Am. J. Hum. Genet.
The identification of genes that evolve under recessive natural selection is a long-standing goal of population genetics research that has important applications to the discovery of genes associated with disease. We found that commonly used methods to evaluate selective constraint at the gene level are highly sensitive to genes under heterozygous selection but ubiquitously fail to detect recessively evolving genes. Additionally, more sophisticated likelihood-based methods designed to detect recessivity similarly lack power for a human gene of realistic length from current population sample sizes. However, extensive simulations suggested that recessive genes may be detectable in aggregate. Here, we offer a method informed by population genetics simulations designed to detect recessive purifying selection in gene sets. Applying this to empirical gene sets produced significant enrichments for strong recessive selection in genes previously inferred to be under recessive selection in a consanguineous cohort and in genes involved in autosomal recessive monogenic disorders.

### Gilbert et al. (2022) Genetics
The distribution of fitness effects (DFE) for new mutations is one of the most theoretically important but difficult to estimate properties in population genetics. A crucial challenge to inferring the DFE from natural genetic variation is the sensitivity of the site frequency spectrum to factors like population size change, population substructure, genome structure, and nonrandom mating. Although inference methods aim to control for population size changes, the influence of nonrandom mating remains incompletely understood, despite being a common feature of many species. We report the DFE estimated from 326 genomes of Caenorhabditis elegans, a nematode roundworm with a high rate of self-fertilization. We evaluate the robustness of DFE inferences using simulated data that mimics the genomic structure and reproductive life history of C. elegans. Our observations demonstrate how the combined influence of self-fertilization, genome structure, and natural selection on linked sites can conspire to compromise estimates of the DFE from extant polymorphisms with existing methods. These factors together tend to bias inferences toward weakly deleterious mutations, making it challenging to have full confidence in the inferred DFE of new mutations as deduced from standing genetic variation in species like C. elegans. Improved methods for inferring the DFE are needed to appropriately handle strong linked selection and selfing. These results highlight the importance of understanding the combined effects of processes that can bias our interpretations of evolution in natural populations.

### Chebib and Guillaume (2022) Genetics
Both pleiotropic connectivity and mutational correlations can restrict the decoupling of traits under divergent selection, but it is unknown which is more important in trait evolution. To address this question, we create a model that permits within-population variation in both pleiotropic connectivity and mutational correlation, and compare their relative importance to trait evolution. Specifically, we developed an individual-based stochastic model where mutations can affect whether a locus affects a trait and the extent of mutational correlations in a population. We find that traits can decouple whether there is evolution in pleiotropic connectivity or mutational correlation, but when both can evolve, then evolution in pleiotropic connectivity is more likely to allow for decoupling to occur. The most common genotype found in this case is characterized by having one locus that maintains connectivity to all traits and another that loses connectivity to the traits under stabilizing selection (subfunctionalization). This genotype is favored because it allows the subfunctionalized locus to accumulate greater effect size alleles, contributing to increasingly divergent trait values in the traits under divergent selection without changing the trait values of the other traits (genetic modularization). These results provide evidence that partial subfunctionalization of pleiotropic loci may be a common mechanism of trait decoupling under regimes of corridor selection

### Mughal and DeGiorgio (2022) Genetics
The Patterson F- and D-statistics are commonly used measures for quantifying population relationships and for testing hypotheses about demographic history. These statistics make use of allele frequency information across populations to infer different aspects of population history, such as population structure and introgression events. Inclusion of related or inbred individuals can bias such statistics, which may often lead to the filtering of such individuals. Here, we derive statistical properties of the F- and D-statistics, including their biases due to the inclusion of related or inbred individuals, their variances, and their corresponding mean squared errors. Moreover, for those statistics that are biased, we develop unbiased estimators and evaluate the variances of these new quantities. Comparisons of the new unbiased statistics to the originals demonstrates that our newly derived statistics often have lower error across a wide population parameter space. Furthermore, we apply these unbiased estimators using several global human populations with the inclusion of related individuals to highlight their application on an empirical dataset. Finally, we implement these unbiased estimators in open-source software package funbiased for easy application by the scientific community.

### Khan et al. (2022) PNAS
Significance

Habitat fragmentation is sequestering species into small and isolated populations, with high chances of extinction. Are small and isolated populations at risk for extinction from inbreeding depression? Or does inbreeding and purging of deleterious alleles reduce such threat? Using whole genomes from several wild Indian tiger populations, we provide evidence supporting purging of highly deleterious variants in a small–isolated population. However, our analyses also indicate that the remaining highly deleterious alleles are at high frequencies, suggesting continued inbreeding depression despite some successful purging. We discuss the implications of our results for conservation, including possible genomics-informed genetic rescue strategies.

Abstract

Increasing habitat fragmentation leads to wild populations becoming small, isolated, and threatened by inbreeding depression. However, small populations may be able to purge recessive deleterious alleles as they become expressed in homozygotes, thus reducing inbreeding depression and increasing population viability. We used whole-genome sequences from 57 tigers to estimate individual inbreeding and mutation load in a small–isolated and two large–connected populations in India. As expected, the small–isolated population had substantially higher average genomic inbreeding (FROH = 0.57) than the large–connected (FROH = 0.35 and FROH = 0.46) populations. The small–isolated population had the lowest loss-of-function mutation load, likely due to purging of highly deleterious recessive mutations. The large populations had lower missense mutation loads than the small–isolated population, but were not identical, possibly due to different demographic histories. While the number of the loss-of-function alleles in the small–isolated population was lower, these alleles were at higher frequencies and homozygosity than in the large populations. Together, our data and analyses provide evidence of 1) high mutation load, 2) purging, and 3) the highest predicted inbreeding depression, despite purging, in the small–isolated population. Frequency distributions of damaging and neutral alleles uncover genomic evidence that purifying selection has removed part of the mutation load across Indian tiger populations. These results provide genomic evidence for purifying selection in both small and large populations, but also suggest that the remaining deleterious alleles may have inbreeding-associated fitness costs. We suggest that genetic rescue from sources selected based on genome-wide differentiation could offset any possible impacts of inbreeding depression.

