# Monthly Journal Review May/June 2022

Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
- Copy from "mjr-2022-06-13.md"

## Genetics
- Copy from "mjr-2022-06-13.md"

## PLoS Biol
- Copy from "mjr-2022-06-13.md"

## PNAS
- Rivollat et al. (2022) Ancient DNA gives new insights into a Norman Neolithic monumental cemetery dedicated to male elites. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119 (18) e2120786119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2120786119 **aDNA, Middle Neolithic, Western Europe, Norman Neolithic cemetery, megaliths, patrilineal society**
- Wu et al. (2022) An antagonistic pleiotropic gene regulates the reproduction and longevity tradeoff. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119 (18) e2120311119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2120311119 **antagonistic pleiotropy, reproduction–longevity tradeoff, evolution of aging, Caenorhabditis elegans, brood size, lifespan, nutrient production, vitellogenin**
- Cazalis (2022) Species richness response to human pressure hides important assemblage transformations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119 (19) e2107361119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2107361119 **human activity, biodiversity loss, species richness, replace then remove framework, biotic homogenisation**
- Wang et al. (2022) Neo-sex chromosome evolution shapes sex-dependent asymmetrical introgression barrier. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119 (19) e2119382119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2119382119 **Y degeneration; hybridization; inversion; meiotic drive; neo-sex chromosome**
- Campos et al. (2022) Female reproductive aging in seven primate species: Patterns and consequences. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119 (20) e2117669119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2117669119 **aging; demography; fertility; maternal-effect senescence; parental-effect senescence**
- Slavin & Sebbane (2022) Emergence and spread of ancestral Yersinia pestis in Late-Neolithic and Bronze-Age Eurasia, ca. 5,000 to 2,500 y B.P. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119 (21) e2204044119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2204044119 **Yersinia pestis, ancient pathogens, pest**

## Theor Popul Biol
- Nothing this month

## Picks summary