# Monthly Journal Review December 2021 and January 2022

Author: Simon Aeschbacher

## Journals covered
- American Journal of Human Genetics (Am J Hum Genet)
- Genetics
- PLoS Biology (PLoS Biol)
- Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America (PNAS)
- Theoretical Population Biology (Theor Popul Biol)

## Am J Hum Genet
- Guerrini et al. (2022) Family secrets: Experiences and outcomes of participating in direct-to-consumer genetic relative-finder services. Am J Hum Genet 109(3):486–497, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.01.013. **adoption; ancestry; direct-to-consumer genetic testing; donor conception; family secrets; misattributed parentage; non-paternity event; relative matching** *Pick*
- Pedersen E. et al. (2022) Accounting for age of onset and family history improves power in genome-wide association studies. Am J Hum Genet 109(3):417–432, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.01.009. **genome-wide association study, age of onset, family history, mortality, liability threshold model, UK Biobank**

## Genetics
- Arjun Biddanda, Matthias Steinrücken, John Novembre, Properties of Two-Locus Genealogies and Linkage Disequilibrium in Temporally Structured Samples, Genetics, 2022;, iyac038, https://doi.org/10.1093/genetics/iyac038 **two-locus genealogies, temporal structure, linkage disequilibrium, ancient DNA, population genetics**

## PLoS Biol
- Otte WM, Vinkers CH, Habets PC, van IJzendoorn DGP, Tijdink JK (2022) Analysis of 567,758 randomized controlled trials published over 30 years reveals trends in phrases used to discuss results that do not reach statistical significance. PLOS Biology 20(2): e3001562. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3001562 **scientific writing, significance, use of language, perception** *Pick*

## PNAS
- PRDM9 losses in vertebrates are coupled to those of paralogs ZCWPW1 and ZCWPW2. Cavassim, Maria Izabel A and Baker, Zachary and Hoge, Carla and Schierup, Mikkel H and Schumer, Molly and Przeworski, Molly. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences March 2022, 119(9) e2114401119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2114401119 **PRDM9 evolution; comparative genomics; genetics; phylogenetics; recombination**
- Warming temperatures drive at least half of the magnitude of long-term trait changes in European birds. McLean, Nina and Kruuk, Loeske E B and van der Jeugd, Henk P and Leech, David and van Turnhout, Chris A M and van de Pol, Martijn. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences March 2022, 119(10) e2105416119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2105416119. **birds; global warming; phenotypic trait** *Pick*
- Purging of deleterious burden in the endangered Iberian lynx. Kleinman-Ruiz, Daniel and Lucena-Perez, Maria and Villanueva, Beatriz and Fernández, Jesús and Saveljev, Alexander P and Ratkiewicz, Mirosław and Schmidt, Krzysztof and Galtier, Nicolas and García-Dorado, Aurora and Godoy, Jose A. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences March 2022, 119(11) e2110614119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2110614119 **conservation; genetic load; population genomics; purging; small populations** *Pick*
- Genetic ancestry in precision medicine is reshaping the race debate. Krainc, Talia and Fuentes, Agustín. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences March 2022, 119(12) e2203033119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2203033119. **genetic ancestry, race, precision medicine**
- GWAS on birth year infant mortality rates provides evidence of recent natural selection. Wu, Yuchang and Furuya, Shiro and Wang, Zihang and Nobles, Jenna E and Fletcher, Jason M and Lu, Qiongshi. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences March 2022, 119(12) e2117312119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2117312119. **infant mortality; recent natural selection; regional GWAS** *Pick*
- Genetics, leadership position, and well-being: An investigation with a large-scale GWAS. Song, Zhaoli and Li, Wen-Dong and Jin, Xuye and Ying, Junbiao and Zhang, Xin and Song, Ying and Li, Hengtong and Fan, Qiao. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences March 2022, 119(12) e2114271119, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2114271119. **GWAS; genetics; leadership; management; well-being**

## Theor Popul Biol
- Nothing new this month.

## Picks summary

### Guerrini et al. (2020) Am J Hum Genet
In recent decades, genetic genealogy has become popular as a result of **direct-to-consumer (DTC) genetic testing**. Some DTC genetic testing companies offer **genetic relative-finder (GRF) services** that compare the DNA of consenting participants to identify genetic relatives among them and provide each participant a list of their relative matches. We surveyed a convenience sample of GRF service participants to understand the prevalence of discoveries and associated experiences. **Almost half (46%) of the 23,196 respondents had participated in GRF services only for non-specific reasons that included interest in building family trees and general curiosity. However, most (82%) also learned the identity of at least one genetic relative.** Separately, most respondents (61%) reported learning something new about themselves or their relatives, including potentially disruptive information such as that a person they believed to be their biological parent is in fact not or that they have a sibling they had not known about. **Respondents generally reported that discovering this new information had a neutral or positive impact on their lives, and most had low regret regarding their decision to participate in GRF services.** Yet some reported making life changes as a result of their discoveries. Compared to respondents making other types of discoveries, **those who learned that they were donor conceived reported the highest decisional regret and represented the largest proportion reporting net-negative consequences for themselves**. Our findings indicate that discoveries from GRF services may be common and that the consequences for individuals, while generally positive, can be far-reaching and complex.

Methods
- Preliminary survey, pretest, feedback, revision
- Main survey programmed in Qualtrics: quasi-metric scale (select one), and multiple response options
- Descriptive statistics

### [Otte et al. (2022) PLoS Biology]
The power of language to modify the reader’s perception of interpreting biomedical results cannot be underestimated. Misreporting and misinterpretation are pressing problems in randomized controlled trials (RCT) output. This may be partially related to the statistical significance paradigm used in clinical trials centered around a P value below 0.05 cutoff. Strict use of this P value may lead to strategies of clinical researchers to describe their clinical results with P values approaching but not reaching the threshold to be “almost significant.” The question is how phrases expressing nonsignificant results have been reported in RCTs over the past 30 years. To this end, we conducted a quantitative analysis of English full texts containing 567,758 RCTs recorded in PubMed between 1990 and 2020 (81.5% of all published RCTs in PubMed). We determined the exact presence of 505 predefined phrases denoting results that approach but do not cross the line of formal statistical significance (P < 0.05). We modeled temporal trends in phrase data with Bayesian linear regression. Evidence for temporal change was obtained through Bayes factor (BF) analysis. In a randomly sampled subset, the associated P values were manually extracted. We identified 61,741 phrases in 49,134 RCTs indicating almost significant results (8.65%; 95% confidence interval (CI): 8.58% to 8.73%). The overall prevalence of these phrases remained stable over time, with the most prevalent phrases being “marginally significant” (in 7,735 RCTs), “all but significant” (7,015), “a nonsignificant trend” (3,442), “failed to reach statistical significance” (2,578), and “a strong trend” (1,700). The strongest evidence for an increased temporal prevalence was found for “a numerical trend,” “a positive trend,” “an increasing trend,” and “nominally significant.” In contrast, the phrases “all but significant,” “approaches statistical significance,” “did not quite reach statistical significance,” “difference was apparent,” “failed to reach statistical significance,” and “not quite significant” decreased over time. In a random sampled subset of 29,000 phrases, the manually identified and corresponding 11,926 P values, 68,1% ranged between 0.05 and 0.15 (CI: 67. to 69.0; median 0.06). Our results show that RCT reports regularly contain specific phrases describing marginally nonsignificant results to report P values close to but above the dominant 0.05 cutoff. The fact that the prevalence of the phrases remained stable over time indicates that this practice of broadly interpreting P values close to a predefined threshold remains prevalent. To enhance responsible and transparent interpretation of RCT results, researchers, clinicians, reviewers, and editors may reduce the focus on formal statistical significance thresholds and stimulate reporting of P values with corresponding effect sizes and CIs and focus on the clinical relevance of the statistical difference found in RCTs.

## McLean et al. (2022) PNAS
**Climate change is impacting wild populations**, but its relative importance compared to other causes of change is still unclear. Many studies assume that changes in traits primarily reflect effects of climate change, but this assumption is rarely tested. We show that **in European birds global warming was likely the single most important contributor to temporal trends in laying date, body condition, and offspring number**. However, **nontemperature factors were also important** and acted in the same direction, implying that attributing temporal trends solely to rising temperatures overestimates the impact of climate warming. **Differences among species in the amount of trait change were predominantly determined by these nontemperature effects**, suggesting that species differences are not due to variation in sensitivity to temperature.

Many wild populations are experiencing temporal changes in **life-history and other phenotypic traits**, and these changes are frequently assumed to be driven by climate change rather than nonclimatic drivers. However, this assumption relies on three conditions: that local climate is changing, traits are sensitive to climate variability, and other drivers are not also changing over time. Although many studies acknowledge one or more of these conditions, all three are rarely checked simultaneously. Consequently, the relative contribution of climate change to trait change, and the variation in this contribution across traits and species, remain unclear. We used **long-term datasets on 60 bird species in Europe to test the three conditions in laying date, offspring number, and body condition and used a method that quantifies the contribution of warming temperatures to changes in traits relative to other effects**. Across species, **approximately half of the magnitude of changes in traits could be attributed to rising mean temperature**, suggesting that increasing temperatures are likely the single most important contributor to temporal trends and emphasizes the impact that global warming is having on natural populations. There were also substantial **nontemperature-related temporal trends** (presumably due to other changes such as urbanization), which generally caused trait change in the same direction as warming. Attributing temporal trends solely to warming thus overestimates the impact of warming. Furthermore, contributions from nontemperature drivers explained most of the interspecific variation in trait changes, raising concerns about comparative studies that attribute differences in temporal trends to species differences in climate-change sensitivity.

Methods
- Two long-term datasets on common bird species:
    - UK: British Trust for Ornithology's Nest Record Scheme: laying date and offspring number. Area divided into three latitudinal bands. Daily mean temperature records from the European Climate Assessment and Dataset for the UK.
    - NL: site-specific Dutch Constant Effort Site program: changes in body condition (as the residual from a liner regression of body mass on wing length, age, sex, and capture timing). Daily mean temperature records from the Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute
- Inference of "climate windows", i.e. time windows that best explain variation in response variables. Randomisation test to account for spurious results.
- Path analysis using structural equation model: separate temporal change in a trait into a contribution from temperature-related trait changes over time and nontemperature-related changes over time.

## Kleinmann-Ruiz et al. (2022) PNAS
--> BIO784

## Wu et al. (2022) PNAS
**Quantifying natural selection** in human populations is a central topic in evolutionary biology and human genetics. Current studies to identify which single-nucleotide polymorphism has undergone selection suffer from **limited sample sizes and large uncertainties in the timing of selection**. In this study, we advance the field by **showing that a genome-wide association study (GWAS) on infant mortality rate can identify recent selection signals**. Our study produces well-powered **genome-wide maps for selection**. It replicates two selection signals that were detected in a previous study using ancient DNA, substantially improves the resolution on the timing of selection, and provides evidence for very recent selection during World War II. It also provides fundamental insights into how to interpret GWAS results.

Following more than a century of phenotypic measurement of natural selection processes, much recent work explores **relationships between molecular genetic measurements and realized fitness in the next generation**. We take an innovative approach to the **study of contemporary selective pressure** by examining **which genetic variants are “sustained” in populations as mortality exposure increases**. Specifically, we deploy a so-called **“regional GWAS”** (genome-wide association study) that links the **infant mortality rate (IMR) by place and year in the United Kingdom with common genetic variants among birth cohorts in the UK Biobank**. These cohorts (**born between 1936 and 1970**) saw a **decline in IMR from above 65 to under 20 deaths per 1,000 live births**, with **substantial subnational variations and spikes alongside wartime exposures**. Our results show **several genome-wide significant loci, including LCT and TLR10/1/6, related to area-level cohort IMR exposure during gestation and infancy**. **Genetic correlations** are found across multiple domains, including **fertility, cognition, health behaviors, and health outcomes**, suggesting an important role for cohort selection in modern populations.

Terms:
- LCT, lactase locus on chromosome 2
- TLR1-TLR6-TLR10 cluster, on chromosome 4. Toll-like receptor genes, which are part of the innate immune system and expressed on sentinel cells (macrophages, dendritic cells) to recognise structurally conserved molecules derived from microbes.

Methods:
- Mortality table produced by A Vision of Britain through Time to obtain IMR. Constructed county-year-specific IMR from 1930 to 1970.
- Regional GWAS by "regional phenotypic value" (same place of birth and same year of birth)
- Inference of pairwise family kinship. Only kept independent samples (330,340 from 65 counties born between 1934 and 1970)
- GWAS with sex, genotype array and year of birth (as a dummy for non-linear time trend?) as covariates.
- LD score regression (LDSC software) to estimate heritability of IMR, quantify enrichment, and estimate genetic correlations.
- Single-density scores (SDS) to measure strength of association, corrected for population stratification
- Data on German air raids on the UK during World War II


## Picks by others

Mathieu
- RAxML Grove: tree topologies simulated in combination with parameter estimates.

Thomas
- G3: Maize domestication (2 papers)
- PLoS Comput Biol: Szimin and Salzberg: SAMBA uses long-read sequencing data to improve genome assemblies, intended to increase contiguity of existing references.
- van Andel et al. (2022): African crops with Asian origin
- Am J Botany: McElderly et al. (2022): How early does the selfing syndrome arise? Asking about the succession of steps that make up the entire syndrome. Grew clonal replicates. Found that onset of selfing not correlated with changes in other traits. Pollinators key initiators of switch to selfing.

Christine
- Nat. Ecol. Evol. Viral transmission in pumas and the effect of hunting on this. Cessation of hunting changed the population dynamics and caused an increase in viral expansion.
- Nat. Rev. Genet. Pitfalls of applying machine learning in genomics.
- Nat. Rev. Genet. Ultra-conserved elements - review – mutations in UCE do not need to be detrimental

Peter
- Science: Domestication of Siamese fighting fish. Loci underlying the domestication traits mostly unlinked. Authors propose this a new model.
- PLoS Biology: PacBio assembly of raspberry

Domi
- Proc. Roy. Soc. B: You are what you wear. Horn size in ewes. Intra-sexual competition. Ewes with larger horns have a higher life-time reproductive success.