{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1561\cocoasubrtf400
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue0;\red9\green80\blue208;
}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\csgray\c0;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c0\c41176\c85098;
}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf2 From: genetics-gsa@msubmit.net\
Subject: GENETICS/2018/300875 - Reviewer Thank You\
Date: 14 June 2018 at 07:14:39 CEST\
To: saeschbacher@mac.com\
Reply-To: genetics-gsa@thegsajournals.org\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf2 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0
\cf3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec3 June 14, 2018 \
2192\
\
Dear Dr. Aeschbacher: \
\
Thank you for reviewing this manuscript for GENETICS. \
\
Peer review of research reports is an essential part of science, and the Editors appreciate the time and effort you devoted to this important job. Your efforts are well-invested in GENETICS because all decisions on manuscripts are made, based on your recommendation, by editors who are practicing scientists \'97 peers of you and the authors (see Editorial Principles and Practices: {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.genetics.org/content/192/3/761.full"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \ul \ulc4 \strokec4 http://www.genetics.org/content/192/3/761.full}}).\
\
We are pleased that the average time it takes us to make a first decision on a manuscript submitted to GENETICS is now only about 30 days. Thanks for helping us improve the journal's turnaround time. \
\
Thanks for your service to our community!\
\
Sincerely, \
\
John Novembre\
Associate Editor\
GENETICS\
\
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------\
Decision: \
Reconsider Pending Revision\
Subject: GENETICS/2018/300875 - Editorial Decision\
\
June 13, 2018 \
\
GENETICS/2018/300875 \
Detection and classication of hard and soft sweeps from unphased genotypes by multilocus genotype identity \
\
Dear Dr. DeGiorgio: \
\
Three experts in the field have reviewed your manuscript, and I have read it as well, and I am pleased to tell you that it is potentially suitable for publication in GENETICS. However, the reviewers have comments and concerns that need to be addressed in a revised manuscript. You can read their reviews at the end of this email. \
\
If you submit a revised manuscript please include a response to each of the reviewers' comments. It is most important that you address the following in a revised manuscript: 1) The second and third reviewer both had concerns regarding the impact of cryptic population structure and whether the resulting departures from Hardy Weinberg proportions would impact the method. In addition, a related issue is whether admixture can create false-positive soft-sweep signatures. Doing a few illustrative simulations to address whether these concerns are substantiated and providing cautionary text in the discussion in these regards should be sufficient. 2) The third reviewer also recommends removing redundancy in the manuscript, which we agree would be helpful. \
\
I look forward to receiving a revised manuscript. I expect it could be submitted within 60 days, but please let me know if you think you will need more time to complete the revision. \
\
Follow this link to submit the revised manuscript: Link Not Available \
\
I also want to thank you for your patience, as this review process took longer than we hoped due to some unusual difficulties with our initial round of review invites. We expect the next round of review will be quicker. \
\
If you have questions about the reviews or this message, please contact me. \
\
Sincerely, \
\
John Novembre \
Associate Editor \
GENETICS \
\
\
Nicholas Barton \
Senior Editor \
GENETICS \
\
-------------------------------------------------------------------- \
\
\
Reviewer #1 (Comments for the Authors (Required)): \
\
Review of 'Detection and classification of hard and soft sweeps from unphased genotypes by multilocus genotype identity' for genetics \
\
In a recent paper, Garud et al. (2015) developed a series of simple and intuitive statistics (denoted H12 and H2/H1) to test for and classify hard and soft selective sweeps using phased DNA sequence data. The current manuscript extends Garud's approach by presenting and evaluating a new set of statistics (G12, G123 and G2/G1) that can be calculated from unphased data. This is an important extension given the ubiquity of unphased data (particularly when working with non-model systems). The manuscript is very well written and was a pleasure to read. Simulations are used to explore the efficacy of the method across a reasonable range of conditions and the method is also successfully applied to human genetic data. Key limitations of the method are mostly addressed. In total, I think this will be a useful tool and one that can readily be applied to many data sets. Nonetheless, I have a few (mostly minor) suggestions for revising the paper. \
\
1. Hard vs. soft sweeps. In general, I found the presentation of hard vs. soft sweeps in the introduction very lucid. With that said (and as is commonly done in the literature), hard vs. soft sweeps were given as binary categories, and (importantly) this categorical thinking extends to the simulations/classification associated with the method (more on the latter below). In some ways it seems more useful to think of the number of haplotypes contributing to a sweep than to always dichotomize this as hard (k=1) and soft (k>1). For example, a hard sweep (k=1) and a soft sweep with k = 2 (or k=3) are in some ways more similar than either are to a soft sweep with k = 20 (or something like that). I don't want to make too big of a deal about this and I realize the way things are described is consistent with current usage and emphasis in the literature, but it might be nice to have a sentence pointing out that this is really a continuum. \
\
2. Simulating soft sweeps. Simulations for soft sweeps are described at the top of page 24. This is mostly clear, but there is one point that needs clarification, and that could be an issue. The manuscript states that selected mutations are introduced in k = 2,...,32 haplotypes (out of N = 1000). I can interpret this two ways. Considering as an example k = 2, this could mean that 2 of the 1000 gene copies in the population would get the mutation or that two distinct haplotypes will be drawn from them and that all copies of those haplotypes would have the mutation. These are of course the same thing if every gene copy (sequence) in the population is unique, but otherwise they are not. The former would simulate a sudden pulse of new mutations (the recurrent mutation version of soft sweeps, but oddly with all of the mutations happening at once), whereas the latter is closer to what one might expect with actual standing genetic variation. Please clarify and justify the way soft sweeps were simulated. \
\
3. The ABC approach. The justification for k = 3 or k = 5 for the ABC inference was not clear to me. I think it would generally be better to instead place a prior on k and use ABC to then estimate a posterior for k (instead of using Bayes factors). From this on could calculate the posterior probability of, e.g., k = 1 (a hard sweep) or k > 1 (a soft sweep), but also simply obtain credible intervals (of various sorts) on k. Then, even if you couldn't confidently infer k = 1 (for example) you might still be able to conclude that k was likely 1 or 2 (which is itself informative). This goes back in some ways to my earlier statement about the distinction between hard and soft sweeps, but even if one ignores that, the current choice of k would need to be justified. \
\
4. Other minor comments: \
\
- It might be nice to discuss the relative merits of attempting to phase data statistically and using the H statistics, versus simply using the G statistics proposed here. \
\
- Uncertainty in genotypes is another common issue with DNA sequence data, particularly when dealing with non-model systems. This could be accounted for in the proposed method by generating estimates of the G statistics over the posterior distribution of genotype estimates. Maybe this is worth mentioning or trying; I think it would be of interest to many folks, particularly given how easy it would be. \
\
- Panels C and D for figures 3 and 4 appear to have four colors/distinct lines. But if these are for the same simulations as panels A and B, shouldn't these have one line per frequency cutoff (Fig. 3; 10 lines) or k (Fig. 4, 5 lines)? \
\
\
\
Reviewer #3 (Comments for the Authors (Required)): \
\
Harris and colleagues present a simple but potentially very useful extension of the H12 statistic. Although haplotype based statistics, such as H12 are interesting because has been shown to be able to distinguish between classic hard and soft sweeps, their application has so far been limited to a handful of human and Drosophila datasets, organisms in which fully phased, large re-sequence datasets exist. Harris et al develop a straightforward set of statistics (G12, G123) which is analogous to H12, but instead of being based on the expected heterozygosity of the most frequent classes of haplotypes, considers frequencies of diploid multilocus genotypes (MLG). The authors show using simulation that, perhaps surprisingly, G12 and G123 have very similar properties (power, ability to distinguish between and robustness) to H12. They also compare the relative performance of H12 and G12 statistics on human data from the 1000 genomes project and again show, convincingly I think, that although not requiring phase information, G12 gives very similar with a. I found this manuscript interesting and well written and believe that it would make a solid contribution to Genetics. I have a few suggestions/questions, which I hope are helpful in improving the MS: \
\
1) p.5 Harris at al's new statistic is based on the combined frequency of the three most common diploid multilocus genotypes (q1+q2+q3) and this is motivated as a direct analog to the H12 statistic which is based on the expected homozygosity of the two most common haplotypes (p1+p2). Harris et al note that "for a situation in which haplotypes X and Y are both at high frequency, diploid individuals of type XX YY and XY will exist at high frequency". However, as I understand from Figure 1, q1, q2 and q3 are solely defined via their relative frequency and are not in any way constrained to be compatible with the presence of the two underlying haplotypes. If so, it would be good to make this clearer somehow. \
My questions are: \
i) To what extent would it be possible and/or helpful to build in such a constraint? \
ii) Given two common haplotypes at roughly equal frequencies p1 and p2, we would expect the most common MLG to be at frequency q1=2*p1*p2 and runs of homozygosity at frequency q2=p1^2 and q3=p2^2. How often do we observe such runs of homozygosity in the human data in soft sweep regions? \
iii) It would be useful to make the connection with runs of homozygosity (and test based on those) more explicit here. \
\
2) As Harris at al argue in the discussion, the new G stats are potentially most useful for exploring selection in organisms for which obtaining fully phased individual genomes (e.g. from parent offspring trios) is not possible. However, resequence datasets for those organisms are typically considerably smaller than the sample size of n=100 Harris at al consider in all their simulation based power tests. It would therefore be extremely useful to know how much power the new G stats have for smaller sample sizes, say 50 and 20 individuals which, although still large, are more typical for non-human studies. \
\
3) The set-up of the comparison of G and H stats on the Human data is clever: Harris et al compare the G and H on exactly the same phased data and reconstitute diploid MLGs by combining the two haplotyped of each individual. It would be very interesting to know how much more similar G123 trajectories and outlier sets based on them are to their H12 analogs when diploid MLG are constructed at random. This would allow to quantify the extent to which any differences between G and H stats are due to departures from HWE. \
\
4) A potential confounding scenario not considered here is population structure. Structure causes deviations from HWE and depending on the sampling scheme may lead to two haplotypes at intermediate and so generate false positives. It would be very useful to include some simulations at least for a simple structured population to show how sensitive the new G stats are to structure when sampling is clustered (e.g. two sampled demes in a symmetric island model with a large number of unsampled demes). \
\
- p. 5 bottom "simulations following human parameters", reword; I know what you mean but it sounds odd. \
- p. 13 "... while NNT was significant for G12 only" How can this be given that you've shown that G stats have slightly lower power than the H equivalents in the simulation study. Is this because G stats are sensitive to departures from HWE? \
- throughout the paper: "method power", and "method sensitivity" is grammatically odd: either drop "method" or use articles. \
\
\
\
Reviewer #4 (Comments for the Authors (Required)): \
\
# Summary \
\
In a very well-written manuscript that seems technically flawless, Harris et al. present an approach for detecting and classifying selective sweeps from unphased multilocus genotypes (MLGs). The method extends the haplotype-homozygosity based approach of Garud et al. (2015) multilocus genotype (MLG) identity. Although there are now several methods for detecting selective sweeps based on linkage disequilibrium or extended haplotype homozygosity, all of them except for the one by Garud et al. (2015; NR Garud being a coauthor of the present manuscript, too) lack the ability to distinguish between hard and soft sweeps. Garud et al. (2015) have shown that the ratio of the haplotype homozygosity for all but the most frequent haplotype (H2) to the overall haplotype homozygosity (H1) has power to delineate soft and hard selective sweeps. This discrimination power depends on a statistic H12 (H123) that represents the haplotype homozygosity after the two (three) most frequent haplotypes have been pooled, and which has power to detect but not categorise sweeps. \
\
The significance of the approach by Harris et al. is hat the MLG analoga to the H-statistics, i.e. G1, G2, G12(3), can be computed from non-phased data. This is a major asset given that phased genomic data are still scarcely available beyond a small set of model organisms, and so extends the applicability of the framework substantially. Yet, the conceptual innovation and originality of the manuscript appears to be within narrow bounds given the previous work by Garud et al. (2015). Harris et al. do make an important contribution though by thoroughly testing the robustness of their MLG homozygosity approach to confounding factors including population bottlenecks, population expansions, balancing selection, background selection, and the way missing data are deatl with. The authors perform forward simulations to measure the power to detect sweeps under these various scenarios, and to assess the ability to discriminate between soft and hard sweeps. Harris et al. illustrate their results in a visually very appealing way. The authors also apply their approach to phased haplotype data from four populations of the 1000 Genomes project. They corroborate previously identified sweeps, but also indentify novel ones. A pronounced difference between African (YRI) and non-African (CEU, GIH, CHB) populations in the relative abundance of identified hard vs. soft sweeps calls for an explanation and should be discussed to some larger extent. \
\
Harris et al. find that the MLG identity statistics have generally high power to detect sweeps, and to classify them as soft or hard in substantial parts of the space of the MLG statistics. In particular, the methods is fairly robust against deviations from a constant-size demographic history and to background selection. Generally, detection power is highest for strong and recent sweeps, as expected. However, balancing selection can severely interfere with the detection power and lead to a high false-postitive rate. The authors also study the effect of admixture masking some of the sweep signal, and find that if single-pulse admixture proportions are sufficiently low (< 0.3), then their MLG statistics retain power to detect a hard sweep. \
\
I think that the manuscript is of high interest and very nicely done. I did have a few concerns (see below) related to the robustness and biological scope, as well as to the assumption of Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. Overall, I am undecided as to whether in its current state the manuscript qualifies for publication in GENETICS, since, from a technical point of view, it is to a large extent of an extending, rather than innovative, nature. I think the latter concern could be removed if some of the major concerns mentioned below (false positives under admixture, robustness to non-random mating, visualisation of simulated likelihood surfaces) were included, as these points would on their own add substantial biological insight and guide future applications of the method. That said, the manuscript is quite long already, and I suggest that the authors make another effort to shorten it. I feel there is quite some scope for condending the main text, especially by removing redundancy in the description of the methods or moving some of it to the supporting information. \
\
\
\
# Major concerns \
\
**1.** The principal reasoning underlying the new approach by Harris et al. is that the most frequent haplotypes yield the most frequent (homozygous) MLGs. However, this holds only under the assumption of random mating. In certain organisms, such as plants that (partially) self, or in populations with a cryptic population structure, mating is not random. Natural selection, too, may lead to a distortion of Hardy-Weinberg proportions at least temporarilly. Therefore, it would seem appropriate if the authors tested the robustnes of their method to deviations from the assumption of random mating (e.g. due to partial selfing or cryptic population structure). \
\
**2.** While the authors study the effect of admixture masking an existing hard sweep, they leave unaddressed the question of whether and to what extent admixture alone can create false-positive (soft-)sweep signatures. I think this should be addressed with another set of simulations focussed on establishing the effect on detection and classification power as a function of admixture strength and time. See also major concern **5.** below. \
\
**3.** The authors do not report how the power of their approach to discriminate between hard and soft sweeps relates to the frequency with which test combinations of G12 (G123) and G2/G1 are encountered in their simulations, given their prior believes in model parameters. In other words, it is unclear how often biological systems occupy the summary-statistics space for which detecion and discrimination power are highest. Figures 5, 6, and S6 are very nice and provide much insight. It would be desirable, though, that the authors also showed the joint distribution of the simulated statistics, e.g. of the (G12, G2/G1) values in the case of Figure 5 A and B, separately for hard and soft sweeps. This would reveal how the ability to distinguish between the two types of sweeps relates to the ferquency at which the test-value combinations are to be expected. If Bayes factors are high or low only in situations that have a very low absolute frequency, then this would somewhat reduce the encouraging results shown in terms of method power and Bayes factors only. \
\
**4.** Related to the previous concern, the reader's intuition of what makes the MLG identity statistics powerful statistics could be increased if the authors visualised the simulated (i.e. empirical) probability mass function of the G statistics as a function of the parameters (as a proxy of the joint likeihood function). This would approximate the marginal distribution of each of the statistics (e.g. G123, or G2/G1) as a joint function of the start time (t) and strength (s) of the sweep, and could be done for a small set of meaningful combinations of f and k. \
\
**5.** The applications to a subset of the 1000 Genomes data reveal the striking pattern that the YRI show a much larger relative proportion of soft vs hard sweeps, as compared to the CEU, GHI, and CHB populations. I was wondering if, besides the out-of-Africa bottneleck(s) and subsequent adaptation explaining a potential excess of recent hard sweeps in non-African populations, underappreciated admixture in YRI (e.g. Busby et al. 2016, eLife, doi: 10.7554/eLife.15266) could have created some apparent soft-seep signals, and so be part of the explanation of this striking difference. A detailed investigation of this question seems beyond the scope of the paper. However, I think that addressing major concern **2.** above will provide some insight, and the issue deserves some more discussion in the main text. \
\
\
\
# Minor comments \
\
\
Abbreviations used: \
- C: comment \
- Q: question \
- S: suggested change [a -> b means replace a by b] \
- R: requested change [a -> b means replace a by b] \
\
\
## Abstract \
- [Second-to-last sentence] S: "...based on human parameters.." -> "...based on parameters compatible with our recent understanding of human demography..." \
\
\
## Introduction \
- [p. 3, l. 3] S: "...signatures, hard sweeps and soft sweeps,..." -> "...signatures, those of hard sweeps and soft sweeps, respectively,..." [I think the formulation depends on whether a sweep is considered a process or a pattern; I favour the former] \
- [p. 3, l. 21] S: "selected allele" -> "one of the selected alleles" \
- [p. 4, l. 1] R: Fix citation style for Chen et al. (2015) \
- [p. 4, l. 7] S: "...computed as expected..." -> "...computed as the expected..." \
- [p. 4, l. 17] S: "...is expected haplotype..." -> "...is the expected haplotype..." \
- [p. 4, l. 25] S: "...MLGs are a single string representing a..." -> "MLGs are single strings representing a..." \
\
\
## Results \
- [p. 8, l. 31] R: "...produces..." -> "...produce..." \
- [p. 11, l. 23] C: Here and throughout the rest of the paper, I found the use of "parameter space" inappropriate, as the G and H statistica are not parameters, but summary statistics. I suggest using a different term. \
- [p. 12, l. 31] R: Fix citation style for Huber et al. (2016) \
\
\
## Discussion \
- [p. 14, l. 28] S: "...sweeps, resulting in a..." -> "...sweeps, which results in a..." \
- [p. 15, l. 1] S: "...further back in time..." -> "...if they started far enough back in time..." \
- [p. 15, l. 4] R: "...allele decreases." -> "...allele decreases due to recombination." \
- [p. 15, l. 6-9] C: The flip side perhaps worth mentioning is that it is difficult to detect and classify weak positive selection. \
- [p. 16, l. 26-30] S: Remind the reader of how the Bayes factor was designed, i.e. that it is P[soft]/P[hard], not the inverse. \
- [p. 19, l. 25-28] C: It seems very plausible that G12 and G123 (or H12 and H123) have weak power to distinguish an almost complete hard sweep from balancing selection if h approaches 1, as the latter is then close to directional selection. However, I was wondering if the authors could add G2/G1 into the mix here, and see if the combination of G12 and G2/G1 has more power to differentiate between a hard sweep and balancing selection than has G12 (G123) alone. \
- [p. 19, l. 32] S: "...reduction in nucleotide diversity,..." -> "...reduction in nucleotide diversity and a distortion of the site-frequency spectrum,..." \
- [p. 20, l. 12-14] C: Besides obscuring the true signal of a sweep, admixture (from a ghost population) may also create a false signal of a sweep, and so I think the authors should assess the false-positive rate under simulations of a neutral admixture scenario, with varying admixture times and proportions. See major concern **2.** above. \
- [p. 21, l. 25] S: Based on the results shown, it seems bold to claim that the method by Harris et al. provides a means of distinguishing sweeps from balancing selection without saying that this distinction is restricted to a set of conditions that is hard to verify in practice. It would seem more conservative to claim that the method can differentiate between selective sweeps and background selection. \
- [p. 21, l. 26] S: "...differentiation lends itself well for use as a..." -> "...differentiation motivates the use of MLG identity statistics as a..." \
\
\
## Materials and Methods \
- [p. 22, l. 7] S: Add recombination as a process simulated by SLiM 2 \
- [p. 23, l. 11] S: "...heterozygote advantage selection..." -> "...heterozygote-advantage selection..." \
- [p. 23, l. 16] R: Insert a comma after both occurrences of "G2/G1" in this sentence. \
- [p. 23, l. 25-26] R: Please specify the base of the logarithming prior scales. \
- [p. 24, l. 3] C: The authors seem to use $N$ to denote both the haploid and diploid population size, depending on the context. As this is confusing, I suggest to change this. \
- [p. 24, l. 25-28] S: "Balancing selection simulations..." -> "Simulations of balancing selection...". C: To be more precise, I suggest using "overdominant directional selection" to describe what the authors currently call "balancing selection". At least, this specification should be made once, if the authors want to stick to the term "balancing selection" in the remainder of the paper. \
- [p. 25, l. 1] S: "...our single background selection scenario..." -> "...our single background-selection scenario..." \
- [p. 26, l. 10] S: "...spatial signature..." -> "...genomic signature..." \
- [p. 26, l. 21-22] S: "...under a constant population size demographic history..." -> "...under the demographic scenario of a constant population size..." \
- [p. 28, l. 1-5] R: Please split this sentence, it seems too long. Q: How important is this additional filter for mappability and alignability? \
\
## References \
- [p. 35] S: "GENETICS" -> "Genetics" in reference to Loh et al (2013) \
- [p. 36] C: Volume (and issue) missing for reference to Muhlfeld et al. (2009) \
\
## Figures \
- [Figure 2] S: I suggest the authors add an illustration of the admixture model (this could also be a figure in the supporting information). \
\
## Supporting Material \
- [Figure S4] R: Please remind the reader of the selection coefficient used for the results shown. \
- [Figures S7 and S8] C: For Chromosome 2, it is not clear if all the gene names refer to the same peak (around 136 Mb) unless one also considers Figure 7. Q: What is the difference between the black and grey lines? C: This is a detail, but it appears as if the visualisation linearly interpolates across gaps due to missing information, which does not seem desirable. \
- [Figures S19 and S20]: R: Please make the legend labels more self-explanatory. In the caption, replace "...to detect sweeps." by "...to detect hard sweeps.". \
\
\
\
\
Associate Editor Comments:\
}