{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1138\cocoasubrtf510
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf2 From: jen@molecol.com\
Subject: Decision for MEC-13-1080, Molecular Ecology\
Date: 24 November 2013 17:08:20 CET\
To: jen@molecol.com\
\
24-Nov-2013\
\
Dear Reviewer,\
\
A decision of 'Reconsider after revision' has been rendered for 'Human facilitated metapopulation dynamics in an emerging pest species, <i>Cimex lectularius</i>', which you recently reviewed for Molecular Ecology. The comments of all reviewers and the decision letter are included at the bottom of this email.\
\
Your participation in the peer-review process is critical to the journal's success and directly impacts the quality of the research we publish. We appreciate your assistance with the evaluation of the manuscript and hope that we may contact you for assistance with future submissions falling within your areas of interest and expertise.\
\
All the best,\
\
Dr. Jennifer Gow\
Managing Editor, Molecular Ecology\
jen@molecol.com\
\
\
Decision letter in full:\
24-Nov-2013\
\
Dear Dr. Fountain:\
\
Your manuscript entitled 'Human facilitated metapopulation dynamics in an emerging pest species, <i>Cimex lectularius</i>' has now been reviewed and assessed by an Editor. Their comments are included below. Unfortunately, this manuscript cannot be accepted in its present form. However, the Editor has indicated that if you can complete the required changes satisfactorily, the manuscript may then be cleared for acceptance without the need for further reviewer assessment. Please realize that this is not a guarantee that a revised manuscript will be accepted. If the Editor does not regard the revised manuscript as satisfactory, the automatic decision will be to reject the manuscript, possibly with encouragement for a further resubmission at a later stage.\
\
To submit your revised manuscript, log in to your Manuscript Central account and click on the 'manuscripts with decisions' link, click 'create a revision' and follow the on-screen instructions. Please do not upload your revised manuscripts as a new submission. When submitting your revised manuscript, you will be able to respond to the comments below in the space provided. You should also use this space to document any changes you make to the original manuscript. In order to expedite the processing of the revised manuscript, please be as specific as possible in your responses.\
\
IMPORTANT: Your original files will be available to you when you upload your revised manuscript. Please delete any outdated files before completing the submission.\
\
Thanks for including the data accessibility statement - please do upload these data to Dryad. It would great if you could also upload the R code used for the analysis and the corresponding input files.\
\
Molecular Ecology expects that data supporting the results in the paper should be archived in an appropriate public archive, such as GenBank, Gene Expression Omnibus, TreeBASE, Dryad, the Knowledge Network for Biocomplexity, your own institutional or funder repository, or as Supporting Information on the Molecular Ecology web site. Data are important products of the scientific enterprise, and they should be preserved and usable for decades in the future. Authors may elect to have the data publicly available at time of publication, or, if the technology of the archive allows, may opt to embargo access to the data for a period up to a year after publication. Exceptions may be granted at the discretion of the editor, especially for sensitive information such as human subject data or the location of endangered species. For guidelines on data deposition best practice, please visit http://datadryad.org/depositing\
\
We also strongly encourage authors to make their analysis input files and associated scripts available whenever possible, as these greatly enhance the value of archived data.\
\
In order to schedule publication efficiently, we impose a deadline of 30 days for the return of revised manuscripts. Manuscripts returned after the deadline may be regarded as new submissions, with a new receipt date, and may be subject to the full peer review process.\
\
I look forward to receiving your revised manuscript in due course.\
\
All the best,\
\
Dr. Jennifer Gow\
Managing Editor, Molecular Ecology\
6270 University Blvd\
Vancouver, BC\
V6T 1Z4\
Canada\
E-mail: jen@molecol.com\
\
Editor Comments to Author:\
\
Your resubmission has been assessed by two Expert Reviewers. While Reviewer #3 feels the work can be published as is, Reviewer #4 still raises a series of criticisms and concerns in a extraordinarily thorough review, which will help strengthening the article even further. I invite you to address their comment carefully and to submit a final revision of your paper.\
\
Prof. Fran\'e7ois Balloux\
Subject Editor, Molecular Ecology\
\
Reviewer Comments to Author:\
\
Reviewer: 3\
\
Recommendation: Accept\
\
Comments:\
General Comments\
\
This is an extremely well written paper that clearly describes both the biology and the ABC analyses conducted to investigate this. The authors show convincingly that the data clearly support scenario 2 for the populations studied. There is a very useful consideration of the limitations and promises of the approach in the Discussion as well as appropriate coverage of the implications of the findings for metapopulation studies and bed bug control. Both the approach used and the biological question addressed, warrant publication in Molecular Ecology. I have a few minor suggestions below that the authors may like to consider.\
\
Minor Comments\
\
Page 5 lines 98, 99 and page 7 line 143: A little more explanation of what is meant by a refugium in this context would be useful.\
Page 7 lines 147-149: Not clear. Could do with some clarification.\
Page 20, lines 443-447. Long, hard to follow sentence. Could do with some clarification.\
\
\
Additional Questions:\
Quality of Science: Experimentally and/or theoretically excellent reliable data, no fatal flaws\
\
Importance of Science: Research addresses a consequential question in ecology, evolution, behaviour, or conservation\
\
Quality of Presentation: Writing is clear, methods and data analyses are transparent, ideas make sense, proper grammar and spelling is employed, redundancy is avoided\
\
Does this manuscript require significant reduction in length? If 'Yes", please indicate where shortening is required in your specific comments: No\
\
Does the Data Accessibility section list all the datasets needed to recreate the results in the manuscript? If \'91No\'92, please specify which additional data are needed in your comments to the authors.: I didn't check\
\
\
\
\
Reviewer: 4\
\
Recommendation: Reject, encourage resubmission\
\
Comments:\
Please find detailed comments in a separate PDF file.\
\
Additional Questions:\
Quality of Science: Mostly competent, but suffering from flaws of a technical or analytical nature\
\
Importance of Science: Research primarily descriptive and/or only relevant to the taxon being studied\
\
Quality of Presentation: Writing is clear, methods and data analyses are transparent, ideas make sense, proper grammar and spelling is employed, redundancy is avoided\
\
Does this manuscript require significant reduction in length? If 'Yes", please indicate where shortening is required in your specific comments: No\
\
Does the Data Accessibility section list all the datasets needed to recreate the results in the manuscript? If \'91No\'92, please specify which additional data are needed in your comments to the authors.: I didn't check}